CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MARYSVILLE, OHIO 
____________ Republished in 2019 
____________ 

> 
CODE OF MARYSVILLE, OHIO 
ROSTER OF OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MARYSVILLE, OHIO 
____________ 
COUNCIL 
  
J.R. Rausch 
Mayor/President of Council 
____________ 
Henk Berbee 
Vice Mayor/Vice President of Council 
____________ 
Mark Reams, At Large 
Scott Brock, Ward 1 
Alan Seymour, Ward 2 
Deborah Groat, Ward 3 
Nevin Taylor, Ward 4 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Rebecca Dible 
Clerk of Council 
  
OFFICIALS 
  
Terry Emery 
City Manager 
____________ 
Tim Aslaner 
City Law Director 
____________ 
Justin Nahvi 
Director of Finance 
____________ 
Floyd Golden 
Chief of Police 
____________ 
Jay Riley 
Fire Chief 
____________ 
Michael Andrako 
Public Service Director 
____________ 
Jeremy Hoyt 
City Engineer 
Joe Tracey 
Streets Superintendent 
____________ 
Eric Hinkle 
Parks and Grounds Superintendent 
____________ 
Scott Sheppeard 
Water Superintendent 
____________ 
Rich Felton 
Wastewater Superintendent 
____________ 
Aaron Story 
IT Director 
____________ 
Brian Dostanko 
Human Resources Director 
____________ 
Anna Krutowskis 
Senior Executive Assistant 
  
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Marysville, Ohio. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through December, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the 1994 Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The arrangement and numbering of the Codified Ordinances into component codes, titles, chapters and sections are based on an adaptation of the decimal numbering system which is similar to that used in the Ohio Revised Code, and in accord with the best accepted practice in instituting a codification. Each section is self-identifying as to code, chapter and section number. For example, 305.06 indicates that the code number is 3, the chapter number is 305 (or the 5th chapter within code 3), and the section number is .06. The code and chapter numbers appear left of the decimal, with the code number preceding the first two digits left of the decimal, and the chapter number being all digits left of the decimal. The section number appears right of the decimal. As another example, 113.10 indicates the code number is 1, the chapter number is 113 (or the 13th chapter within code 1), and the section number is .10. 
    This numbering system has the advantage of inherent flexibility in allowing for an almost endless amount of expansion. Codes, titles and chapters initially are odd-numbered, thus reserving the use of even numbers for future legislation. Sections within chapters are consecutively numbered, except that penalty provisions are usually assigned the number .99 as used in the Revised Code. Newly created sections subsequent to the original codification may be indicated by three digits right of the decimal in the event the law properly belongs between two consecutively numbered sections. For example, newly created 575.061, 575.062 and 575.063 follow 575.06 and precede 575.07 to be placed in their logical position. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the dash are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the dash represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the dash indicates the number of the title and chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, when applicable, the letter immediately to the left of the dash indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE C1:1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES TSO:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 CODE INDEX Ci:1  
Index 
    Each particular item has been placed under several headings, using the language generally used in the title, chapter and section titles of the Code. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Benjamin Rangel, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ron Todd for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marysville, Ohio. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marysville, Ohio. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 3-95 
AN ORDINANCE TO APPROVE, ADOPT AND ENACT THE 1994 CODIFIED ORDINANCES; TO REPEAL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH; TO PUBLISH THE ENACTMENT OF NEW MATTER; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Marysville, are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, property, health, safety and welfare of the City and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and 
    WHEREAS, Council has heretofore entered into a contract with the Walter H. Drane Company to prepare and publish a new codification; and 
    WHEREAS, the codification of such ordinances, together with the new matter to be adopted, the matters to be amended and those to be repealed are before Council; now therefore: 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARYSVILLE, OHIO, That: 
    SECTION 1. The ordinances of the City of Marysville, Ohio, of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified, rearranged and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections are hereby approved, adopted and enacted as the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville, Ohio, 1994. 
    SECTION 2. The provisions of this Ordinance, including all provisions of the Codified Ordinances, shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 4 of this Ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof enacted prior to November 10, 1994, which are inconsistent with any provision of the Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance, except as follows: 
(a)  The enactment of the Codified Ordinances shall not be construed to affect a right or liability accrued or incurred under any legislative provisions prior to the effective date of such enactment, or an action or proceeding for the enforcement of such right or liability. Such enactment shall not be construed to relieve any person from punishment for an act committed in violation of any such legislative provision, nor to affect an indictment of prosecution therefor. For such purposes, any such legislative provision shall continue in full force notwithstanding its repeal for the purpose of revision and codification. 
(b)  The repeal provided above shall not affect: 
(1)  The grant or creation of a franchise, license, right, easement or privilege. 
(2)  The purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property. 
(3)  The appropriation or expenditure of money or promise or guarantee of payment. 
(4)  The assumption of any contract or obligation. 
(5)  The issuance and delivery of any bonds, obligations or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(6)  The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges. 
(7)  The establishment, naming, vacating or grade level of any street or public way. 
(8)  The dedication of property or plat approval. 
(9)  The annexation or detachment of territory. 
(10)  Any legislation enacted subsequent to November 10, 1994. 
    SECTION 3. The Clerk of Council, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.23, shall cause to be published in a manner required by law a summary of the new matter contained in the Codified Ordinances. One book-form copy of the Codified Ordinances shall be certified as correct by the Mayor and the Council Clerk, attached to this Ordinance as a part hereof, and filed with the permanent ordinance records of the City. 
    SECTION 4. This Ordinance is hereby declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants, and for the further reason that there exists an imperative necessity for the earliest publication and distribution of the Codified Ordinances to the officials and residents of the City, so as to facilitate the administration and daily operation of the City and avoid practical and legal entanglements, and provided it receives the affirmative vote of four of the members elected to Council it shall take effect and be in force immediately upon its passage. 
1st Reading December 22, 1994 
2nd Reading January 12, 1995 Emerg. 
3rd Reading January 26, 1995 
Passed January 26, 1995 Emerg. 
/s/ Steve C. Lowe 
      PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL   ATTEST: 
/s/ Lois J. Reese 
      CLERK OF COUNCIL   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Michael J. Grigsby 
      LAW DIRECTOR   PRESENTED TO MAYOR 1/27/95 
APPROVED BY MAYOR 1/27/95 
/s/ Thomas L. Kruse 
      THOMAS L. KRUSE, Mayor   
CHARTER 
CHARTER 
FOR THE MUNICIPALITY OF 
MARYSVILLE, OHIO [1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Marysville Charter was initially approved by the voters on November 3, 1981. It was amended November 5, 2013, and effective January 1, 2016. 

PREAMBLE 
We the people of the Municipality of Marysville, Ohio, in order to preserve and improve our form of municipal government, do adopt this Charter subject to review and amendment as provided herein. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE I. - REPEAL OF EXISTING CHARTER 

Sec. 1.01. - All sections repealed. 
All provisions of the Charter for the Municipality of Marysville, Ohio, originally approved by the voters May 3, 1960, and effective December 1, 1960, together with any subsequent amendments thereto are repealed. 
ARTICLE II. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS 

Sec. 2.01. - Name and boundaries. 
The Municipal Corporation now existing as the City of Marysville, Ohio, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and with the same boundaries, with power and authority to change its boundaries and annex other territory in any manner authorized by any general or special law of Ohio. 
Sec. 2.02. - Form of government. 
The form of government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager form of government." 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 2.03. - Powers of the City. 
The City shall have all powers of local self-government and home rule possible for a city under the Constitution of the State of Ohio. All such powers shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or by ordinance and resolution consistent with this Charter, or when not prescribed by either, then in the manner provided by the General Laws of Ohio. 
Sec. 2.04. - Salary of elected officials. 
Salaries shall be the same for all Council members. Salaries for all Council members shall be set by ordinance at least five (5) days prior to the last day of filing for candidacy for the ward Council members and/or at least five (5) days prior to the last day of filing for candidacy for the at-large Council members. Otherwise, salaries for Council members may not be changed at any other time during their terms. 
Salaries for all other elected official(s) shall be set by ordinance for an ensuing term at least five (5) days prior to the last day of filing for candidacy and shall not be changed at any time during their term(s). 
(Amended November 8, 2017) 
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.01. - Number, selection, and term. 
The Council shall consist of seven (7) members. Three shall be elected from the City at large and four shall be elected, one from each of four wards established in Sec. 3. The term of members of Council shall be for four years beginning January 1, next following their election, and they shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
Any qualified elector, residing in the municipality, who is not the occupant of an incompatible office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the Council; provided that those representing wards shall be residents of wards they represent. Vacancies in Council shall be filled by appointment of a qualified person. The appointment shall be made by a majority vote of Council members. If Council fails to fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days, the President of Council shall make the appointment within fifteen (15) days of Council's failure to do so. The appointee shall fill the vacancy until the next regular municipal election. If this election falls in the middle of the term for said Council position, said position will be filled for the unexpired term. 
(Amended November 6, 1984) 
Sec. 3.03. - Wards. 
After each recurring Federal census and after the report of the Secretary of State of the population of the City, Council shall by ordinance divide the City into four wards of substantially equal population and as substantially compact and contiguous territory. Precincts are then determined by the Board of Elections based on the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016). 
Sec. 3.04. - Meetings, officers, and organization of council. 
Council may adopt its own rules, regulations, by-laws, order of business, and meeting dates, and it shall keep a record of all its proceedings which shall be open for public inspection. It may elect or appoint a clerk and such other officers or employees as is provided by law. It may establish regular and special meeting dates it determines appropriate, but it shall have a least two regularly scheduled meetings each month. Except where contrary to this Charter, provisions of Ohio law for non-Charter cities shall govern the meetings, organizations and officers of council. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 3.05. - City employees. 
Neither Council nor any of its members or committees shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or the removal or transfer of any person from office or employment by the City Manager or subordinate thereof, or in any manner take part or interfere in the appointment, discipline, transfer or removal of officers or employees in any part of the administrative service of the city for which the city manager is responsible. No member of Council shall intercede for or participate as counsel or attorney for any officer or employee subordinate to the City Manager, in any hearing or investigation having to do with the discipline or removal of such officer or employee, except in hearings before Council. Except for purposes of inquiry, Council and its members shall deal with any portion of the service of the City for which the City Manager is responsible solely through the City Manager. Neither Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately, either directly or indirectly. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 4.01. - Ordinances, resolutions, manner of adoption, and effective date. 
The Legislative authority of the City shall be exercised by the Council. The manner of adoption of ordinances and emergency measures, as well as the time of taking effect, of all such ordinances shall be governed by the Law relating to non-Charter cities. Resolution is defined as the formal, written enactment of a municipal legislative authority of a less permanent nature, not prescribing any permanent rules of conduct and usually required or applied to the preliminary declaration of a legislative intent to be effectuated by the subsequent passage of an ordinance, or for the disposition of a specific matter not required by statute or charter provision to be done by ordinance. 
Resolutions which do not involve the expenditure of money may be adopted by a majority vote of the members of Council following a single reading by title only, and such resolutions shall become effective immediately upon their adoption. Resolutions which involve the expenditure of money shall require three readings on three separate days, unless a reading has been dispensed with by a three-fourths vote of all members elected to Council. 
(Amended November 3, 2009; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 4.02. - Initiative, referendum, and recall. 
The electors reserve to themselves the powers of initiative and referendum to the extent permitted and by the procedure provided by the Law and Constitution of Ohio. Any elective officer may be removed from office by recall before expiration of this term. The procedure to be followed shall be as provided by Section 705.92 of the Revised Code of Ohio, as it may be amended from time to time, or if said Section is repealed, as provided by any successor Section or Sections subsequently enacted into the Statutes of the State of Ohio providing for the recall of municipal officers. 
ARTICLE V. - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 5.01. - Mayor. 
At the first regular meeting of Council in January of each year, Council shall elect one of its members as the Mayor for a term of one year. The Mayor shall: (1) Serve as President of Council and preside at all meetings of Council; (2) Perform ceremonial duties and functions as necessary; (3) Exercise military powers and functions granted to mayors of municipal corporations by the laws of the State of Ohio or the laws of the United States; and 4) Perform or exercise such other powers, duties and functions as provided by the Charter and Council to the extent such authorization or direction of Council is consistent with the Charter. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 5.02. - Vice Mayor. 
At the first regular meeting of Council in January of each year, Council shall elect one of its members as the Vice Mayor for a term of one year. The Vice Mayor shall serve as the President protempore of Council. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall succeed to the office of Mayor to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term and Council shall elect another of its members to the office of Vice Mayor to serve for the unexpired term of office. In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall exercise all powers, duties and functions of the Mayor. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 5.03. - Acting Mayor. 
In the event of the temporary absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the senior Council member, based on length of continuous elected service with the City, shall serve as the acting Mayor. If two or more Council members have held the same length of continuous elected service with the City, then an acting Mayor shall be chosen from among said two or more Council members by a vote of Council. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 5.04. - Compensation. 
Compensation for service as Mayor shall be established by Council. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6.01. - City Manager. 
All administrative functions not otherwise provided for the Law Director and Finance Director in this Charter, shall be combined in a Department of Administration under a City Manager. The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of Council. The City Manager should have executive and administrative experience, be an exclusive employee of the City, and be responsible for the supervision and direction of all appointed City Officers and City employees, and for coordination of the elected offices. Compensation of the City Manager shall be established by Council. 
The City Manager shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the City and shall exercise supervision and control of all executive departments and divisions of the City. The City Manager shall be the Chief conservator of the peace within the City and shall see that all laws, ordinances and resolutions are faithfully obeyed and enforced. Except for elected officers, the City Manager shall have the powers to appoint, promote, transfer, reduce, or remove any administrative officer or employee of the City subject to the Civil Service Ordinance as from time to time amended. 
The City Manager shall advise Council as to the financial condition and needs of the City, including necessary appropriation measures. The City Manager shall see that the terms and conditions of any franchise or contract to which the City is a party are faithfully kept and performed. Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, the City Manager shall execute all contracts to which the City is a party. Together with the Director of Finance, the City Manager shall execute on behalf of the City all conveyances and evidences of indebtedness. The City Manager shall report to Council regarding the state of the City in the first quarter of each calender year and at such other times as the Council may direct. 
The City Manager shall serve on the Board of Control and the Treasury Investment Board. 
(Amended November 8, 2017; Ord. 27-17 . Passed 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 6.02. - Right in Council of the City Manager. 
The City Manager may attend all meetings of the Council and shall be notified of all meetings by the Clerk of Council according to the Rules of Council. The City Manager and officers thereof shall attend meetings of Council when requested to do so by Council. The City Manager may introduce ordinances and resolutions in the Council and take part in the discussions on all matters coming before it, but shall not have any vote therein. The City Manager shall make such recommendations to the Council for the welfare of the City as deemed suitable. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 6.03. - Procedure for removal. 
The City Manager may be suspended and/or removed by resolution of Council which shall set forth the reasons for proposed suspension and/or removal. A copy of such resolution shall be served immediately upon the City Manager. The City Manager shall have five days in which to reply in writing, and upon written request served upon the Clerk of Council, shall be afforded a public hearing, which shall occur no earlier than ten days nor later than fifteen days after the hearing is requested. After the public hearing, if requested, and after full consideration Council may adopt a final resolution of suspension and/or removal. A decision by Council to suspend or remove the City Manager shall be in the sole discretion of Council and shall not be subject to review by any court. If the City Manager is suspended or removed from duty as provided under this section, Council shall appoint an acting City Manager. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 6.04. - Acting City Manager. 
By letter filed annually with the Clerk of Council by January 31, the City Manager shall designate a City employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during the absence or disability of the City Manager. Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another employee of the City to serve as acting City Manager. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

Sec. 7.01. - Director of Finance. 
The statutory offices of City Auditor and City Treasurer are abolished with their functions to be served by a Department of Finance under a Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the City Manager subject to Council confirmation by majority vote of four elected Council members. The Director of Finance will have at minimum a bachelor's degree in Accounting, Economics or Finance from a nationally accredited university. The Director of Finance shall meet the job requirements as defined in city ordinance. The Director of Finance shall not have an interest in any contract with or expenditure by the City or hold any other public elective office or other position within a municipal government unless permitted or required under this Charter. Salary shall be established by Council. 
(Amended November 8, 2005; Amended November 3, 2009; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016; Ord. 28-17 . Passed 6-12-2017.) 
Sec. 7.02. - Director of Finance, powers and duties. 
The Director of Finance shall: (a) serve on the Board of Control; (b) serve on the Treasury Investment Board; (c) serve the City Manager and Council as financial advisor in connection with municipal affairs and shall keep the financial records of the municipality; (d) be responsible for the collection of all taxes and assessments and shall disburse the same as may be required by ordinance or resolution and by-law; (e) maintain a general accounting system for the municipality and for each of its officers, departments and agencies; (f) keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; (g) keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the municipal budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it, and the unencumbered balance; (h) require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the municipality to be made at such intervals as the Director of Finance may deem expedient; (i) compile a schedule of anticipated income for the next succeeding year and submit the same to the City Manager and Council by May 15 of each year; (j) assist the City Manager in the preparation of the budget, and (k) perform other powers and duties prescribed by the general laws for City auditors and treasurers and such other duties that may be prescribed by ordinance. 
The Director of Finance may: (a) appoint assistants with the approval of Council to assist in carrying out the above duties; (b) institute systems of central purchasing for all departments, offices, and agencies of the City; (c) perform audits on the financial records of any departments, office or agency of the City or hire with approval of Council outside auditors. 
(Amended November 8, 2005; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 

Sec. 8.01. - Law Director. 
The Law Department is hereby created under the direction of a Law Director who shall be elected for a four (4) year term to begin on the 1st day of January next following election to office. The Law Director shall be an elector of the City and shall be an attorney at law admitted to the practice of law in Ohio. The Law Director shall be legal advisor, attorney and counsel for the City and for all offices, departments, divisions, bureaus, boards, commissions, and bodies of the City in connection with 4 Municipal affairs, and subject to the direction of Council, shall represent the City in proceedings in Court or before any administrative board or body. The Law Director shall perform such other duties consistent with said office as may be required by ordinance or resolution of Council or by the Laws of Ohio. The Law Director shall be the Prosecuting Attorney on behalf of the City and shall prosecute cases brought before Courts of competent jurisdiction. The Law Director may hire such assistants as may be approved by Council by resolution and salary of the Law Director and the salary of any assistants of the Law Director shall be established by ordinance. 
(Amended November 8, 2005) 
Sec. 8.02. - Vacancy of office. 
In the event of the death, resignation or recall from office of the Law Director, or ceasing of the Law Director to qualify for such office, Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person. The appointment shall be made by a majority vote of Council members. If Council fails to fill the vacancy within 30 days, the President of Council shall make the appointment within 15 days of Council's failure to do so. The appointee shall fill the vacancy until the next regular municipal election. If this election falls in the middle of the term of said Law Director's position, said position shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(Amended November 8, 1983; Amended November 8, 2005) 
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 9.01. - Departments and divisions. 
Except for the Permanent Departments of Administration, Finance and Law and except for the Permanent Divisions of Police and Fire, Council may, by ordinance, create such Departments and Divisions as are necessary for the efficient administration of the City. The City Manager shall be responsible for the policies and "day-to-day" operation of all such Departments and Divisions. The number of permanent employees, duties of the Departments and Divisions, salaries, etc. may also be established in the ordinance. Departments and Divisions may be expanded, combined or eliminated by an amendment to the ordinance. 
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, qualifications of Department and Division Heads may be set by ordinance and may be amended by Council at any time. Such amendments will not pertain to office holders at the time of the amendment but will be the criteria for future candidates. Qualifications may be stated in the form of a job description. Department and Division Heads will be appointed by the City Manager and ratified by a majority of Council. Department and Division Heads work for the City Manager and may be removed by him/her with reasons for such dismissal submitted to Council. Department and Division Heads shall exercise direct supervision of all employees of the Departments and Divisions. The City will maintain a directory of City Departments and Divisions listing all employees, duties, salaries, addresses, etc. and will periodically distribute the directory to members of Council. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 8, 2005; Amended November 7, 2006; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 9.02. - Permanent divisions. 
For the efficient administration of the City, it is necessary for two Divisions to be considered permanent and may be eliminated only by a change in the Charter. They are: 
A.  Division of Police; 
B.  Division of Fire. 
These Divisions shall be governed by Ordinance, in concert with the Civil Service regulations of the City and the Ohio Revised Code, which may determine such things as number of employees, duties, salaries, etc. In case of civil disturbance, natural disaster or special circumstances, the City Manager may appoint additional personnel for temporary service. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 9.03. - Commissions. 
Several Commissions may be established to assist both the Administration and Council in the efficient operation of the City. Commissions will be created by ordinance, in compliance with the Ohio Revised Code. Commissions are generally advisory bodies whose exact function, powers, meeting times, number of members, etc. will be stated in the Ordinance and/or in the Ohio Revised Code. Commission members will be appointed for three year overlapping terms unless specifically stated otherwise in this Charter, the Codified Ordinance or the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Amended November 2, 1993) 
Sec. 9.03.01. - Planning Commission. 
The City Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) citizen members appointed by a majority vote of all Council members. Members shall be limited to two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be elected by the members. The power and duties of the City Planning Commission shall be set by ordinance. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 6, 2001; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 9.03.02. - Civil Service Commission. 
The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed by a majority vote of all Council members. The Commission will provide for the administration of the Civil Service ordinances, laws and regulations, and the conduct of testing and disposition of appeals pursuant to procedures established by ordinance. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 9.03.03. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the President of Council with a majority of Council approving. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs pursuant to the Codified Ordinances and the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 8, 2005) 
Sec. 9.03.04. - Existing commissions. 
Commissions in existence at the time of this amendment (Nov. 1993) will continue to function according to the Codified Ordinance creating said Commission. When a Commission member's term expires and new appointments are made, they will conform to the term requirement as stated in Sec. 9.04. (Sec. 9.04 repealed November 2, 1993). 
(Amended November 2, 1993) 
ARTICLE X. - TAXATION, DEBT, APPROPRIATIONS, AND FINANCE 

Sec. 10.01. - Limitations and procedures on levying of taxes. 
The amount of taxes which the Council may levy upon all real and personal property within the municipality without a vote of the electorate shall be limited to a maximum of five mills, exclusive of the amount to which the municipality shall be entitled under the constitutional and statutory 10 mill limitation and exclusive of the amount necessary to be levied for the retirement of bonds heretofore or hereafter approved by a vote of the electorate. The procedure for levying of all taxes upon real and personal property shall be in conformity to the general laws. 
Sec. 10.02. - Limitations and procedures on incurring indebtedness. 
The municipality shall not incur indebtedness in excess of the limitations imposed by the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio. The procedure to be followed in authorizing and issuing bonds and notes shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio in effect at the time such bonds or notes are authorized and issued. 
Sec. 10.03. - Preparation and submission of annual tax budget. 
In accordance with the provisions of the general laws, and on or before the 15th day of July of each calendar year, unless another date be prescribed by general law, the Director of Finance under the direction of the Board of Control shall prepare and submit to Council and the Council shall adopt and submit to the County Budget Commission a tax budget for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
Sec. 10.04. - Publicity and hearing on appropriation budget and ordinance. 
Upon receipt of the City Manager's annual appropriation budget and message, the Council shall fix a date and place for a public hearing thereon. A notice of this hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven days before the hearing date setting forth a summary of the proposed appropriation budget and ordinance and indicating the same are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection during usual office hours. A sufficient number of copies of such annual appropriation budget and ordinance shall be provided to enable interested citizens to inform themselves as to the contents before such public hearing. At the public hearing, the Council shall afford reasonable opportunity for interested citizens to present their views. The Council may continue such hearing from day to day as may be necessary. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 10.05. - Reserved. 
(Amended November 2, 1993) 
Sec. 10.06. - Temporary appropriation ordinance. 
Until such time as Council adopts an appropriation ordinance for the current fiscal year, amounts appropriated for operations for the preceding year shall be deemed adopted on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly. However, Council may adopt a different temporary appropriation ordinance as permitted by the general laws of Ohio. 
(Amended November 8, 1983) 
Sec. 10.07. - Annual appropriation ordinance. 
(a)  General. The City Manager shall prepare and submit to Council, no later than November 15 of each year, a proposed annual appropriation budget and ordinance according to the Laws of the State of Ohio, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(b)  Operating Budget. Concurrently with (a) above, the City Manager shall present an operating budget and ordinance to Council that shall provide a complete financial plan of City funds and activities for the next fiscal year. The operating budget shall consist of specific individual line items that identify basic income and expenditures within each fund category. Significant changes in projected income and expenditures shall be by detailed written comment. Included in the operating budget shall be a history of income and expenditures for the preceding two years and a projection for the year following the next fiscal year. Council may request additional information. The operating budget shall be presented in a form acceptable to Council. 
(c)  Capital Improvement Program. Concurrently with (a) above, the City Manager shall present to Council, a capital improvement budget and ordinance for the next fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be accompanied by written comment justifying in detail all requested capital improvements. In addition and for review only, the City Manager shall present to Council a separate four-year proposed capital improvement program to follow the next fiscal year. 
(d)  Council Action. After the required, separately advertised Public Hearing Special Meeting, Council shall place on the regular meeting agenda all three ordinances stated in (a), (b), (c) above, and adopt them no later than April 1 of the next fiscal year. If needed, each separate budget and ordinance shall be subsequently and formally amended. Upon formal adoption, all ordinances appropriating funds for the city's use shall be effective immediately. 
(Amended November 2, 1993; Amended November 6, 2001; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 10.08. - Certain contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
No officer, department or agency shall expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money on behalf of the municipality for any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for such purpose during that fiscal year. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the making of contracts not to be fully performed within the fiscal year when specifically authorized by Council. 
Sec. 10.09. - Board of Control. 
The Board of Control shall consist of the Mayor or a member of City Council appointed by the Mayor, Director of Finance and the City Manager and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this Charter. 
(Amended November 8, 2017) 
Sec. 10.10. - Treasury Investment Board. 
The Treasury Investment Board shall be comprised of the City Manager, Director of Finance, and Director of Law. Said Board shall direct investment of the City's surplus funds according to Chapter 135 of the Uniform Depository Act of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Amended November 4, 1997; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 10.11. - Contracts and purchasing. 
The City Manager may, within the amounts and items appropriated by Council, make purchases and enter into contracts on behalf of the City involving expenditures not in excess of the maximum amount permissible without competitive bidding as provided by Revised Code Section 735.05, as amended. 
The Board of Control shall have jurisdiction of the award of all contracts in excess of the amounts under the jurisdiction of the City Manager. All purchases, advertising, and bidding procedures shall be directed and administered by the Board of Control in accordance with City of Marysville ordinance. 
(Amended November 3, 2009; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE XI. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 11.01. - Municipal elections. 
Except for the first municipal election after adoption of this Charter, the regular municipal election for members of Council and City officers shall be on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd numbered year. No primary election shall be held for the nomination of candidates for Council or City officers. Council may, by resolution, order a special election at any time, the purpose of which shall be set forth in the Resolution. 
Both regular and special municipal elections shall be conducted by the Board of Elections of Union County under the provisions of this Charter, and to the extent not inconsistent with this Charter, elections shall be conducted pursuant to the general law for municipal elections. 
Nominations for the office of Council member shall be made by non-partisan petition. A petition signed by not less than twenty-five electors of the ward shall be required to nominate for the position of councilman from each ward. A petition signed by not less than forty electors from the municipality shall be required to nominate for the position of councilman at large and Law Director. Such petitions shall be 7 in standard form for nomination of a non-partisan candidate as prescribed by the Secretary of State of Ohio and filed at the time and in manner prescribed by the general law. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 11.02. - Determination of successful candidates. 
The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for each office, even though less than a majority of the votes cast for that office, shall be declared elected. Candidates for at large council positions shall run against all other candidates seeking at large positions and electors may cast a number of ballots not in excess of the available at large positions in such election. Those candidates receiving the highest number of votes respectively to the number of vacancies to be filled at any such election shall be declared elected. In the event any of the vacancies are for an unexpired term or for less than a regular four-year term, the successful candidate receiving the least number of votes shall be declared elected to the shortest term, and the next highest number of votes to the next longest term until all vacancies are filled. 
Sec. 11.03. - First election after adoption of Charter amendment. 
In order to assure prompt compliance with the intent of this charter amendment there shall be a special election on March 23, 1982, for the purpose of electing all members of Council, Mayor, and Law Director. Nominating petitions for all of such offices shall be filed with the Union County Board of Elections on or before January 18, 1982. The original term of the Mayor and Council persons representing wards shall be from April 1, 1982, until December 31, 1983, and the term of the Law Director and Council persons-at-large shall be from April 1, 1982, until December 31, 1985. Thereafter elections shall be for regular four-year terms on the November preceding the term of office as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12.01. - Oath of office. 
Every officer and employee of the municipality, before entering upon said duties, shall take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the City Clerk: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Ohio and will obey the laws thereof and that in all respects I will uphold and enforce the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the municipality of Marysville, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter." 
(Amended November 8, 2005) 
Sec. 12.02. - Official bonds. 
All officers and employees of the municipality whose duties require them to handle or be concerned with the management of its money or other property, shall furnish to the Director of Finance, a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business in Ohio, to protect the municipality against loss due to their acts. The bond of the Director of Finance shall be deposited with the Clerk of Council. In each case, the amount of such bond shall be determined by Ordinance. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the municipality. 
Sec. 12.03. - Fees. 
All fees pertaining to any office or received by any officer or employee in connection with the affairs of the municipality or with said duties as such officer or employee of the municipality shall be paid into the treasury and shall belong to the municipality. 
(Amended November 8, 2005) 
Sec. 12.04. - Personal interest. 
No member of the Council or any officer or employee of the municipality shall have any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with or sale to the municipality of any materials, supplies, or services, or any land or interest in land. A person who knowingly and willfully violates this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office and upon conviction thereof shall be removed from office. Any contract or agreement made in violation of this section may be voided by Council. 
Sec. 12.05. - Amendments to Charter. 
Any section of this Charter may be amended as provided in Article XVIII, Section 9, of the Ohio Constitution, by submission of proposed amendments to the electors of the municipality. Such amendments may be initiated either by vote of five members of Council or by petition to Council of a number of electors equal to ten percent of the total electors voting at the last municipal election. However, City Council may by ordinance amend the Charter so that it conforms with changes to State and Federal law. 
(Amended November 5, 2013) 
Sec. 12.05.01. - Charter review. 
This Charter shall be reviewed in 1985 and every four (4) years thereafter. The Charter Review Board shall consist of nine members of the electorate with representation for each ward, not to include elected officials, officers or employees of the municipality. Members shall be appointed by Council at the first Council meeting in January of the year of review. The Charter Review Board shall submit their recommendations to Council on or before the second meeting in July of the year of review, and Council shall certify the Board's recommendation to the Board of Elections to be submitted to the electors at the next regular municipal election. 
(Amended November 6, 1984; Ord. 29-17 . Passed 6-12-2017.) 
Sec. 12.06. - Severability clause. 
If any section or part of section of the Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, which would have been adopted without the invalid portion if such invalidity could have been known at the time of its original adoption. 
Sec. 12.07. - Transitional provisions. 
All ordinances of the municipality in effect at the time of adoption and going into effect of this Charter shall remain in effect, except as superseded by the provisions of this Charter, until they are amended or repealed. 
All persons holding office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in conformity with this Charter for the performance of such duties by a successor or the office is abolished. 
Every employee of the municipality when this Charter takes effect shall be retained in said employment but thereafter shall be subject in all respects to the provisions of this Charter. 
All public records and property in the custody of officers and employees of the municipality shall be transferred and delivered promptly to their successors when these have been designated pursuant to provisions of this Charter. 
All contracts entered into by the municipality or for its benefit, prior to taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at the time this Charter takes effect shall be completed, as nearly as practicable, under the provisions of such laws. 
This Charter shall be executed in duplicate with one copy deposited with the City Clerk and one copy with the Director of Finance until after the election to be held on November 3, 1981. If said Charter is adopted by the electors at such election, one copy shall be kept by the Mayor, and one copy shall be filed with the County Recorder. 
The offices of purchasing agent, planning director and any other offices inconsistent with this Charter amendment are abolished. 
(Amended November 8, 2005; Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
Sec. 12.08. - Effective date of Charter Amendment. 
This Charter shall be voted upon at the general election on November 3, 1981. If approved by the voters, this Charter Amendment shall be effective for the purpose of electing new officers and council persons on March 23, 1982, and for all other purposes on April 1, 1982. All officers and council members elected to office on March 23, 1982, shall assume office on April 1, 1982. Until April 1, 1982, all present offices and personnel shall continue to function under the existing Charter, except that no action or proceeding shall be initiated which is inconsistent with the terms of this Charter Amendment, or which will interfere with the transition on the effective date hereof. (Revised 11/2009) 
Sec. 12.09. - Effective date of amendment, preservation of Charter. 
While preserving remaining provisions of the Charter except as otherwise amended, a Council-Manager plan is adopted effective January 1, 2016 if approved by voters at the general election in November 2013. All appointments and confirmations in effect on December 31, 2015 shall be preserved as if made under the Council-Manager plan and shall be subject to review and termination thereafter as otherwise provided in the Charter. 
(Amended November 5, 2013, Effective January 1, 2016) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date Section   Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 27-17  6-12-2017 I, II 6.01 Ord. No. 28-17  6-12-2017 I, II 7.01 Ord. No. 29-17  6-12-2017 I 12.05.01  
PART ONE - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
  
TITLE ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 101. - CODIFIED ORDINANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances and resolutions, Ch. 123; rules of construction for offenses and penalties,  501.04; statute of limitations on prosecutions,  501.06. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; statute of limitations on prosecutions, ORC 718.06; codification in book form, ORC 731.23; imprisonment until fine and costs are paid, ORC 1905.30, 2947.14; citation issuance for minor misdemeanors, ORC 2935.26 et seq. 

Sec. 101.01. - Designation; citation; headings. 
(A)  All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the Municipality as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the Codified Ordinances of Marysville, Ohio, 1994 for which designation "Codified Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances. 
(B)  All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code". Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "Section" followed by the number, such as "Section 101.01". 
(ORC 1.01) 
Sec. 101.02. - General definitions. 
As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless another definition is provided or the context otherwise requires: 
(A)  And may be read or , and or may be read and , if the sense requires it. 
(ORC 1.02(F)) 
(B)  Another , when to the owner of property which is the subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of property. 
(ORC 1.02(B)) 
(C)  Bond includes an undertaking and undertaking includes a bond. 
(ORC 1.02(D), (E)) 
(D)  Council means the legislative authority of the Municipality. 
(E)  County means Union County, Ohio. 
(F)  Keeper or proprietor includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
(G)  Land or real estate includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
(ORC 701.01(F)) 
(H)  Municipality or City means the City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(I)  Oath includes affirmation and swear includes affirm. 
(ORC 1.59(B)) 
(J)  Owner , when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property. 
(K)  Person includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and association. 
(ORC 1.59(C)) 
(L)  Premises , as applied to property, includes land and buildings. 
(M)  Property means real and personal property. 
(ORC 1.59(E)) 
(1)  Personal property includes all property except real. 
(2)  Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
(N)  Public authority includes boards of education; the Municipal, County, State or Federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official. 
(O)  Public place includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
(P)  Registered mail includes certified mail and certified mail includes registered mail. 
(ORC 1.02(G)) 
(Q)  Rule includes regulation. 
(ORC 1.59(F)) 
(R)  Sidewalk means that portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(S)  This State or the State means the State of Ohio. 
(ORC 1.59(G)) 
(T)  Street includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the Municipality. 
(U)  Tenant or occupant , as applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
(V)  Whoever includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private. 
(ORC 1.02(A)) 
(W)  Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. This provision does not affect any law relating to signatures. 
(ORC 1.59(J)) 
Sec. 101.03. - Rules of construction. 
(A)  Common and Technical Usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly. 
(ORC 1.42) 
(B)  Singular and Plural; Gender; Tense. As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(2)  Words of one gender include the other genders. 
(3)  Words in the present tense include the future. 
(ORC 1.43) 
(C)  Calendar; Computation of Time. 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Week means seven consecutive days. 
(b)  Year means twelve consecutive months. 
(ORC 1.44) 
(2)  If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
(ORC 1.45) 
(3)  The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day, then such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. If any legal holiday falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday. 
(ORC 1.14) 
(4)  When legislation is to take effect or become operative from and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included. 
(ORC 1.15) 
(5)  In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice. 
(D)  Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
(E)  Joint Authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent with State statute or Charter provisions. 
(F)  Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto. 
Sec. 101.04. - Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal. 
(A)  The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein. 
(ORC 1.57) 
(B)  An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is the same as the prior ordinance. 
(ORC 1.54) 
(C)  The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except as provided in subsection (D) hereof: 
(1)  Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action taken thereunder; 
(2)  Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder; 
(3)  Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; 
(4)  Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended. 
(D)  If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance as amended. 
(ORC 1.58) 
Sec. 101.05. - Construction of section references. 
(A)  A reference to any portion of the Codified Ordinances applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof. 
(ORC 1.55) 
(B)  If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and the last numbers or letters are included. 
(ORC 1.56) 
(C)  Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a series of sections or of subsections of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any section or subsection included in such reference. 
(D)  References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by the Codified Ordinances. 
(ORC 1.23) 
Sec. 101.06. - Conflicting provisions. 
(A)  If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a number, the words govern. 
(ORC 1.46) 
(B)  If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision, they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general provision prevail. 
(ORC 1.51) 
(C)  (1)  If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails. 
(2)  If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different meetings of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into simultaneous operation. 
(ORC 1.52) 
Sec. 101.07. - Determination of legislative intent. 
(A)  In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that: 
(1)  Compliance with the constitutions of the State and of the United States is intended; 
(2)  The entire ordinance is intended to be effective; 
(3)  A just and reasonable result is intended; 
(4)  A result feasible of execution is intended. 
(ORC 1.47) 
(B)  An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless expressly made retrospective. 
(ORC 1.48) 
(C)  If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention of Council may consider among other matters: 
(1)  The object sought to be attained; 
(2)  The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted; 
(3)  The legislative history; 
(4)  The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws upon the same or similar subjects; 
(5)  The consequences of a particular construction; 
(6)  The administrative construction of the ordinance. 
(ORC 1.49) 
Sec. 101.08. - Severability. 
If any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions are severable. 
(ORC 1.50) 
Sec. 101.09. - General penalty. 
Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the Municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs. 
CHAPTER 105. - PUBLIC MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Council meetings, Charter  3.04. 
Cross reference- Disturbing a lawful meeting,  509.02. 
State Law reference- Meetings of public bodies, ORC 121.22. 

Sec. 105.01. - Purpose and scope. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of: 
(A)  Establishing a reasonable method for any person to determine the time and place of all regularly scheduled meetings and the time, place and purpose of all special meetings; 
(B)  Making provisions for giving advance notice of special meetings to the news media that have requested notification; and 
(C)  Making provisions for persons to request and obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public business is to be discussed. 
This chapter shall apply to each municipal body, as defined in Section 105.02 and is in addition to any applicable legal requirements regarding notices to members of a municipal body or to others in connection with specific meetings or specific subject matters. 
(Res. 507-75. Passed 12-11-1975.) 
Sec. 105.02. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Clerk means the Clerk of Council. 
(B)  Day means calendar day. 
(C)  Meeting means any prearranged discussion of the public business of the municipal body by a majority of the members of the municipal body. 
(D)  Municipal body means each of the following: 
(1)  Council. 
(2)  Planning Commission. 
(3)  Parks and Recreation Commission. 
(4)  Civil Service Commission. 
(5)  Board of Sanitation Claims. 
(6)  Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(7)  Board of Sewer Charge Claims. 
Committees of the above municipal bodies comprised of members of such bodies are a "municipal body" if such committees are comprised of a majority of the members of the main municipal body or are decision-making committees. 
(E)  Oral notification means notification given orally either in person or by telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under this chapter. 
(F)  Post means to post in an area accessible to the public during the usual business hours at the office of the Clerk and in the City Hall lobby. 
(G)  Published means published once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Municipality, as defined in ORC 7.12. 
(H)  Special meeting means a meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an adjournment of a regular, or special, meeting to another time or day to consider items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular, or special, meeting. 
(I)  Written notification means notification in writing mailed or delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under this chapter, or in any way delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification refers, provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of mailing and the day of such meeting. 
(Ord. 59-06. Passed 8-10-2006.) 
Sec. 105.03. - Notice of regular and organizational meetings. 
The Clerk shall post a notice of all regularly scheduled meetings, committee meetings or meetings of newly formed bodies stating the time and place of the meeting at least three days prior to the scheduled meeting. The notice shall be posted on the television monitors, which are located in an area visible to the public during the usual business hours in City Hall. 
(Ord. 12-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 105.04. - Notice of special meetings. 
(A)  Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in Section 105.05(D), the Clerk shall, no later than twenty-four hours before the time of a special meeting of a municipal body, post in accordance with Section 105.03, a statement of the time, place and purpose of such special meeting. 
(B)  The statement under this section and the notifications under Section 105.05 shall state such special or general purpose or purposes then known to the Clerk to be intended to be considered at such special meeting and may state, as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may properly come before such municipal body at such meeting may be considered and acted upon. 
(Ord. 12-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 105.05. - Notice to news media of special meetings. 
(A)  Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Clerk a written request therefor. 
Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action as referred to in subsection (D) hereof, a special meeting shall not be held unless at least twenty-four hours advance notice of the time, place and purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media that have requested such advance notification in accordance with subsection (B) hereof. 
(B)  News media requests for such advance notification of special meetings shall specify: the municipal body that is the subject of such request; the name of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom written notifications to the medium may be mailed, or delivered; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons to either one of whom oral notifications to the medium may be given. Any such request shall be effective until the Clerk receives written notice from such medium canceling or modifying such request. Such requests may be modified only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk. 
(C)  The Clerk shall give such oral notification or written notification, or both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have requested such advance notification in accordance with subsection (B) hereof, of the time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least twenty-four hours prior to the time of such special meeting. 
(D)  In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a special meeting may be held without giving twenty-four hours advance notification thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling such meeting, or any one or more of such persons or the Clerk on their behalf, shall immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the person or persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place and purposes of such special meeting to such news media that have requested such advance notification in accordance with subsection (B) hereof. The minutes or the call, or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature of the emergency requiring immediate official action. 
(Res. 507-75. Passed 12-11-1975.) 
Sec. 105.06. - Notification upon request of individuals. 
(A)  (1)  Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may obtain reasonable advance notification all meetings of any municipal body. 
(2)  Such person may file a written request with the Clerk specifying the person's name, and the address and telephone number at or through which the person can be reached during and outside of business hours; the municipal body that is the subject of such request; and the number of calendar months, not to exceed twelve, which the request covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the Clerk. 
(3)  If the person requests notification by mail, each such request shall be accompanied by stamped self-addressed envelopes sufficient in number to cover the number of regular meetings during the time period covered by the request and an estimated number of three special meetings. The Clerk shall notify in writing the requesting person when the supply of envelopes is running out, and if the person desires notification after such supply has run out such person shall deliver to the Clerk an additional reasonable number of stamped self-addressed envelopes as a condition to receiving further notifications. 
(4)  Any person may also request notification as set forth above by facsimile or electronic mail. The Clerk shall respond in the manner by which the request was made or in a reasonable manner prescribed by the requester. 
(B)  (1)  The Clerk shall if possible give such advance notification under Section 105.06 by written notification. If such written notification cannot be given or has not been given, the Clerk shall give oral notification. 
(2)  The contents of written notification under this subsection (B) may be a copy of the agenda of the meeting. Written notification under this subsection may be accomplished by giving advance written notification, by copies of the agendas, of all meetings of the municipal body that is the subject of such request. 
(Ord. 12-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 105.07. - General. 
(A)  Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk during that office's regular office hours to determine, based on information available at that office: the time and place of regular meetings; the time, place and purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether the available agenda of any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business, identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting. 
(B)  Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk may be given by any person acting in behalf of or under the authority of the Clerk. 
(C)  A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. 507-75. Passed 12-11-1975.) 
CHAPTER 107. - WARDS AND BOUNDARIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Boundaries, Charter  2.01. 
State Law reference- Division into wards, ORC 731.06; voting precincts, ORC 3501.18. 

Sec. 107.01. - Wards established. 
The City of Marysville shall be divided into four wards, each containing territory as described below. A map showing boundaries of the four wards is attached to and made a part of Ordinance 17-11. 
(A)  Ward 1. Consisting of an area beginning at the stream (immediately south of Taylor Avenue) and Main Street, west along the stream to the centerline of N. Maple Street, north on the centerline of N. Maple Street to U.S. Rt. 33, west on the centerline of U.S. Rt. 33 to Mill Creek where it crosses the City corporation line, following the corporation line to where it crosses the centerline of Main Street to the place of beginning. 
(B)  Ward 2. Consisting of an area beginning at N. Maple Street and the CSX rail line, north along the centerline of N. Maple Street to the stream (immediately south of Taylor Avenue), east along the stream to N. Main Street, north on the centerline of Main Street to the corporation limits to where it crosses U.S. Rt. 38, north on the centerline of U. S. Rt. 38 to Ninth Street, east on the centerline of E. Ninth Street to Chestnut Street, north on the centerline of Chestnut Street to E. Fifth Street, east on the centerline of E. Fifth Street to N. Cherry Street to the CSX rail line, west along the CSX rail line to the place of beginning. 
(C)  Ward 3. Consisting of an area beginning at London Avenue and Ninth Street, south on the centerline of London Avenue or U.S. St. Rt. 38 to the corporation limits, following the corporation limits to Collins Avenue, east on the centerline of Collins Avenue to Milford Avenue, south on the centerline of Milford Avenue to W. Ninth Street, east on the centerline of W. Ninth Street to the place of beginning. 
(D)  Ward 4. Consisting of an area beginning at N. Cherry Street and the CSX rail line, south on the centerline of N. Cherry Street to E. Fifth Street, west on the centerline of E. Fifth Street to Chestnut Street, south on the centerline of Chestnut Street to E. Ninth Street, west on the centerline of E. Ninth Street to Milford Avenue, north on the centerline of Milford Avenue to Collins Avenue, west on the centerline of Collins Avenue to the corporation limits, following the corporation limits to where it crosses Mill Creek, east on the centerline of U. S. St. Rt. 33 to N. Maple Street, south on the centerline of N. Maple Street to the CSX rail line to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. 17-11. Passed 6-9-2011.) 
CHAPTER 108. - USE OF DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS. 

Sec. 108.01. - General provisions. 
Notwithstanding ORC 735.05 through 735.09, a Design-Build Contract awarded as provided in Sections 108.01 through 108.05 is valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. 14-08. Passed 4-24-2008.) 
Sec. 108.02. - Design/build qualifications. 
(A)  At a time Design-Build services are to be provided under a Design-Build Contract, a Design/Builder must be an Entity, employ an Entity, or have as a partner, member, joint-venturer, or subcontractor, an Entity that is licensed, registered or otherwise qualified under Ohio law to provide the design professional services and construction services to complete the public improvement project and do business in Ohio. 
(B)  In accordance with this chapter, a Design/Builder may contract with the City to provide design professional services and construction services that the Design/Builder is not itself licensed, registered or otherwise qualified under Ohio law to perform if the Design/Builder provides the services through subcontracts with licensed, registered or otherwise qualified Entities under Ohio law. 
(Ord. 14-08. Passed 4-24-2008.) 
Sec. 108.03. - Procurement process. 
(A)  When a Design-Build Contract, estimated under five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) is considered by the City for implementation of a public improvement project, the City shall combine the Qualifications and Proposal in a one-step, competitive procurement process to award the Design-Build Contract. A description of the procurement process shall be included in RFQ-RFP. 
(B)  A Request for Qualification (RFQ)-Request for Proposal (RFP) will be issued which will include qualification criteria. Of qualified respondents, the City will evaluate and rank the remaining RFQ-RFP, negotiate the Design-Build Contract, and award the Design-Build Contract. Prior to ranking of proposers, the City may require and evaluate submittals of preliminary proposals or resubmittals of proposals from each proposer. 
(Ord. 14-08. Passed 4-24-2008.) 
Sec. 108.04. - Qualifications and short-listing of respondents. 
(A)  The City shall advertise the availability of the RFQ-RFP in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City, once a week for two successive weeks. The advertisement shall provide a general description of the public improvement project and the method for obtaining a copy of the RFQ-RFP. 
(B)  The RFQ-RFP shall include the following information: 
(1)  The location of the public improvement project. 
(2)  A general description of the public improvement project. 
(3)  A description of the procurement process. 
(4)  The submittal requirements for the RFQ-RFP. 
(5)  A description of evaluation criteria to be used in short-listing Respondents, including an indication of the relative importance of each criterion. The evaluation criteria may include any of the following: 
(a)  Experience. 
(b)  Past performance. 
(c)  Key staff. 
(d)  Financial capability and condition. 
(e)  Technical approach. 
(f)  Price. 
(g)  Any other criteria defined in the RFQ-RFP. 
(C)  The City may interview or seek clarifications from some or all of the Respondents during the evaluation. 
(D)  After evaluation of the qualifications, in accordance with the criteria set forth in the RFQ-RFP, the City shall short-list the most qualified, responsive Respondents. Provided that the City has received at least two responses, the City may short-list no less than two Respondents. 
(E)  If at any time prior to receipt of Proposals, a short-listed Respondent withdraws from the procurement process, the City may add a Respondent that was not previously short-listed to the short list. 
(F)  The City may establish a maximum budget for the public improvement project and require all price proposals to be less than the maximum budget in order for a Design-Build Contract to be awarded. 
(Ord. 14-08. Passed 4-24-2008.) 
Sec. 108.05. - Evaluation of proposals and award of design-build contract. 
(A)  The City shall evaluate Proposals in accordance with the procurement process and evaluation criteria defined in the RFQ-RFP. 
(B)  As defined in the RFQ-RFP, the City may meet with proposers, seek clarifications on proposals, consider proposed alternatives, revise the RFQ-RFP, or require best and final proposals. 
(C)  The City shall evaluate and rank the proposals, and, if applicable, best and final proposals based on the factors, weighting (if applicable), and process identified in the RFQ-RFP. 
(D)  The City is not required to rank first the proposer that submits the lowest price proposal. 
(E)  The City may reject any and all proposals, except for the purpose of evading the provisions and policies of this chapter. 
(F)  The City may negotiate a Design-Build Contract term with the highest-ranked proposer, except for those terms identified in the RFQ-RFP as nonnegotiable. 
(G)  If the City is unable to negotiate a Design-Build Contract term with the highest-ranked proposer, the City may suspend or end negotiations with the proposer and initiate negotiations with the next highest ranked proposer. 
(H)  The City shall continue in accordance with this procedure until a contract agreement is reached or the selection process is terminated. 
(I)  The Board of Control shall approve the Design-Build Contract. 
(Ord. 14-08. Passed 4-24-2008.) 
CHAPTER 109. - SALE OR LEASE OF MUNICIPALLY-OWNED PROPERTY 

Sec. 109.01. - Authority. 
The City of Marysville shall have the authority to lease or sell municipal property belonging to the City, when such real estate or personal property is not needed for any municipal purpose. 
(Ord. 23-04. Passed 5-14-2004.) 
Sec. 109.02. - Procedure. 
Such power shall be exercised in accordance with ORC Ch. 721, with the following exception: The City of Marysville shall have the power by ordinance to authorize the transfer, lease or conveyance of any real property to the Union County Board of County Commissioners upon such lawful terms as are agreed upon between the City and the Board of County Commissioners, without competitive bidding as required in ORC 721.03, provided that such property is sold for no less than its appraised value. 
(Ord. 23-04. Passed 5-14-2004.) 
CHAPTER 110. - FACILITY COSTS AND CITY FEES 

Sec. 110.01. - Municipal pool passes and admission. 
Resident* Non-Resident** Active Military Resident 1 * Pool Season Passes *** Individual $100.00 $150.00 $90.00 Family of 2 $140.00 $180.00 $120.00 Each Additional Family Member (age 5+) $20.00 $20.00 $20.00 Senior (age 60+) or Child Care Provider $70.00 $90.00 N/A Senior Family of 2 (age 60+) $90.00 $115.00 N/A Daily Admission Ages 4 and Under with Adult Free Free Free Ages 5-18 $5.00 $5.00 $4.00 Ages 19-59 $7.00 $7.00 $6.00 Senior (age 60+) $5.00 $5.00 N/A Family of 3 $15.00 $15.00 N/A Additional Family Member (age 5+) $3.00 $3.00 N/A After 5:00 p.m. (age 5+) $3.00 $3.00 N/A  
* Resident of the City of Marysville (a person who either lives or works in the City of Marysville). 
** Non-resident of the City of Marysville (neither lives nor works in the City of Marysville). 
*** 15% Discount on all Season Passes purchased on or before April 15th. 
1  In order to receive active military discount, proof of service must be presented. 
(Ord. 2-15. Passed 2-12-2015.) 
Sec. 110.02. - Municipal pool rentals. 
Resident* Non-Resident** Notes Pool Rental (8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) Up to 50 people $225.00 $285.00 For each additional 50 people $55.00 $55.00 Group Rate (5 or more, non-family) Child $3.00 N/A Adult $6.00 N/A  
* Resident of the City of Marysville (a person who either lives of works in the City of Marysville), also where applicable, non-profit organizations. 
** Non-resident of the City of Marysville (neither lives or works in the City of Marysville), also where applicable, for-profit organizations. 
Sec. 110.03. - Parks and grounds. 
Parks and Grounds Resident* Non-Resident** Notes Park Shelter Up to 4 hours $30.00 $50.00 Over 4 hours $45.00 $75.00 Sean Doebert Amphitheater (American Legion Park) $50.00 
per hour (plus $100.00 refundable deposit) $70.00 
per hour (plus $100.00 refundable deposit) Partners Parks Pavilion*** $100.00 
per hour (2 hour minimum) $150.00 
per hour (2 hour minimum) A permit is required if alcohol is to be served at the event. Partners Park Alcohol Permit**** $250.00 
(Plus $250.00 refundable deposit) $250.00 
(plus $250.00 refundable deposit) In addition to the permit, the City requires a Special Duty Marysville Police Department Officer to be present during the duration of the event. The cost of the officer is the responsibility of the applicant and is not included in the Alcohol Permit fee. Concession Services Items will be charged at fees which attempt to recover direct costs of operations.  
* Resident of the City of Marysville (a person who either lives of works in the City of Marysville), also where applicable, non-profit organizations. 
** Non-resident of the City of Marysville (neither lives or works in the City of Marysville), also where applicable, for-profit organizations. 
*** The rental fee will be waived for the Donors to the Partners Park. This waiver does not apply to the fee for the alcohol permit or the cost to procure the off duty officer. This waiver will be effective until December 31, 2024. 
**** Alcohol Permit fee and deposit are in addition to the cost for the pavilion rental. 
(Ord. 12-15. Passed 3-26-2015.) 
Sec. 110.04. - Recreational services. 
Recreational service Fee Notes Programs In general, the recreation program will attempt to recover, on an aggregate basis, 50% of costs, while recognizing that some programs may be somewhat less/more. This is to be based on the nature of the programs. This will ensure that individual fees are reviewed annually, and any unusually high/low programs are flagged. Field Usage/Rental Baseball/Volleyball $40.00/day/field 
(tournament play) Classes In general, the recreation program will attempt to recover, on an aggregate basis, 50% of costs, while recognizing that some programs may be somewhat less/more. This is to be based on the nature of the programs. This will ensure that individual fees are reviewed annually, and any unusually high/low programs are flagged. Pool Swimming Lessons $35.00 
(with pool pass) 
$50.00 
(no pool pass) Pool Recreation Classes In general, the recreation program will attempt to recover, on an aggregate basis, 50% of costs, while recognizing that some programs may be somewhat less/more. This is to be based on the nature of the programs. This will ensure that individual fees are reviewed annually, and any unusually high/low programs are flagged. Swim Team $65.00 
(with pool pass) 
$80.00 
(no pool pass)  
  
Sec. 110.05. - Miscellaneous costs and city fees. 
Fee Notes Parks and Grounds Cemetery See Chapter 941 of the Codified Ordinances Tree Information Service $0.00 Streets and Utilities Water Service See Chapter 931 of the Codified Ordinances Sanitary Sewer Service See Chapter 925 of the Codified Ordinances Refuse Collection Service Residential See Chapter 945 of the Codified Ordinances Recycling Collection Service See Chapter 945 of the Codified Ordinances Stormwater Service See Chapter 937 of the Codified Ordinances General Utility Street Usage Fees negotiated as part of franchise agreements Spilled Load Clean-Up Fees will be based upon fully burdened hourly rate plus any out of pocket costs and other direct costs Damage Property Repair Fees will be based upon fully burdened hourly rate plus any out of pocket costs and other direct costs Street/Traffic Sign Service Fees will be based upon fully burdened hourly rate plus any out of pocket costs and other direct costs Finance Department Returned Check (NSF) $20.00 City Administrator's Office Civil Service Testing $10.00/applicant Taxi Cab License $25.00/year per taxicab Plus cost of any legal review performed by the City Various Departments Special Events and Performances Fees will be based upon full burdened hourly rate plus any out of pocket costs and other direct costs Document Printing and Copying Per Page $0.05 City Map/Blue Print $1.50 Planning and Zoning Code Book $35.00 Building Inspection Residential Contract with Union County Commercial Contract with Union County  
Sec. 110.06. - Municipal services. 
Fee Notes Division of Police Parking Violations See Chapter 351 of the Codified Ordinances Solicitor's Permit $75.00 Fingerprinting BCI & FBI $56.00 BCI Only $32.00 FBI Only $24.00 Police Report Reproduction $0.05/copy Police Photo Reproduction Actual cost Plus postage Video/Audio Tape Reproduction Actual cost Tapes supplied Non-emergency Lock Out Assistance $0.00 Other Agency Dispatch The percentage of recovery is dependent on the agreement negotiated between the parties In City Hunting Permit $20.00 Special Duty Police Cruiser Fee $8.00/hour Division of Fire Fire Protection Services to Neighboring Townships Per existing contracts EMS Billing to Non-Residents BLS $650.00 + $12.00 
per patient loaded mile ALS I $750.00 + $12.00 
per patient loaded mile ALS II $850.00 + 12.00 
per patient loaded mile Fire Suppression System Inspection $30.00  
(Ord. 2-15. Passed 2-12-2015.) 
TITLE THREE - LEGISLATIVE 
CHAPTER 111. - COUNCIL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Number of Council members; selection, term, qualifications, Charter  3.01, 3.02; wards established by Council, Charter  3.03; meetings of Council, Ch. 105, Charter  3.04; Council to determine rules, Charter  3.04; Mayor's right in Council, Charter  5.03; Oath of office, Charter  12.01; bonds, Charter  12.02; conflict of interest, Charter  12.04. 

Sec. 111.01. - Duties and responsibilities of the Clerk of Council. 
(A)  The Clerk of Council is appointed by City Council and shall report to City Council. 
(B)  The Clerk of Council shall support the Boards and Commissions appointed by City Council, as follows: Council, Council Committees, Board of Zoning Appeals, Parks and Recreation Commission, and Utility Claims Board of Appeals. Duties include, but are not limited to preparing agendas and packets, general research, attending public meetings, taking of minutes, reading legislation, conducting roll calls; preparing and publishing public notices of hearings; maintaining official records (e.g., ordinances, resolutions, minutes, notices, etc.). 
(C)  The Clerk of Council shall provide back-up support for Boards and Commissions appointed by the Mayor to include recording meeting minutes and preparing board member information packets. 
(Ord. 13-03. Passed 4-10-2003; Ord. 59-06. Passed 8-10-2006.) 
TITLE FIVE - ADMINISTRATIVE 
CHAPTER 120. - EXECUTIVE APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 120.01. - Positions requiring appointment after mayoral change as result of an election. 
(A)  Due to the importance, level of authority and scope of duties of the Director of Administration and Director of Finance positions, the newly elected Mayor must officially appoint the sitting incumbents per the City Charter (Section 6.01 Director of Administration; Section 7.01 Director of Finance). These appointments must take place within a reasonable length of time after the election of the new Mayor, but not to exceed 180 days after the date the Mayor takes office. 
(B)  These appointments do not constitute a contract or promise of employment to either incumbent beyond what is available to each incumbent under law. Both positions are still "at-will" and work at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
(C)  All other executive/exempted positions including, but not limited to, department and division heads do not require appointment by the newly elected Mayor. 
(D)  All executive/exempted positions including, but not limited to, department and divisions heads are still considered "at-will" and work at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
(Ord. 18-08. Passed 7-10-2008.) 
CHAPTER 121. - DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Department of Administration, Charter  6.01; Director on Board of Control, Charter  10.09; purchasing, Charter  10.11. 
Cross reference- Director to act in absence of Finance Director,  123.02. 

Sec. 121.01. - Salary and vehicle. 
(A)  The salary of the Director of Administration shall be as established by Council. 
(B)  The Director shall be furnished a vehicle for use on City business. 
Sec. 121.02. - Snow and ice removal. 
The Director of Administration may, in cases of emergency, contract for snow and ice removal and for such other purposes as set forth in ORC 5735.27. Payments on such contracts shall be made from the State Highway Improvement Fund. 
Sec. 121.03. - Parks and Recreation Director. 
The position of Parks and Recreation Director shall be added to the organizational chart of the City of Marysville. This position will be an unclassified position under the supervision of the Director of Administration. 
(Ord. 14-00. Passed 2-10-2000.) 
Sec. 121.04. - City Planner. 
The position of city planner shall be added to the organizational chart of the City of Marysville. This position will be an unclassified position under the supervision of the Mayor and Director of Administration. 
(Ord. 24-00. Passed 3-10-2000.) 
CHAPTER 122. - DIRECTOR OF LAW[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Department of Law, Charter  8.01; Director on Treasury Investment Board, Charter  10.10. 

Sec. 122.01. - Assistant Law Director. 
(A)  The Law Director is authorized to employ an attorney at law in good standing with the Supreme Court of Ohio to serve as an Assistant Law Director. 
(B)  This position will be a part time position excluded from accrual of sick leave, longevity, vacation pay, sick leave bonus and personal leave hours. 
(Ord. 34-00. Passed 4-27-2000.) 
CHAPTER 123. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Department of Finance, Charter  7.01; powers and duties see, Charter  7.02; Director on Board of Control, Charter  10.09; Director on Treasury Investment Board, Charter  10.10. 
Cross reference- Income tax, Title One, Ch. 141. 

Sec. 123.01. - Salary. 
The salary of the Director of Finance shall be as established by Council. 
(Ord. 752. Passed 12-16-1965.) 
Sec. 123.02. - Director of Administration to act in absence of Finance Director. 
The Director of Administration is hereby designated and authorized to sign all vouchers and checks in the place and stead of the Finance Director at any and all times when the Finance Director is absent from the City and when the Finance Director is disabled and unable to perform his duties. 
Sec. 123.03. - Assistant Director of Finance. 
The position of Assistant Director of Finance shall be added to the Administration as an unclassified position. 
(Ord. 40-00. Passed 5-11-2000.) 
Sec. 123.04. - EMS transportation fees. 
(A)  The following fees are established for the following transportation services: 
(1)  Advanced Life Support (ALS) shall be established at the usual, customary and reasonable rates per patient transported from the location of the patient pick-up to the local hospital. Such rates will be based on ALS billing category criteria as well as customary and reasonable charges for transportation mileage. 
(2)  Basic Life Support (BLS) shall be established at the usual, customary and reasonable rates per patient transported from the location of patient pick-up to the local hospital. Such rates will be based on BLS billing category criteria, as well as customary and reasonable charges for transportation mileage. 
(B)  The Mayor shall establish and conduct a billing system for the collection of such fees in accordance with State and federal laws, regulations and guidelines. Such system shall include an insurance only billing plan for residents, accepting tax receipts in lieu of individual payments for service. In no event shall any uncollected fee for service be referred to a collection agency, nor will any report be made to any credit reporting service in relation to any unpaid balance. 
(C)  The Mayor, Finance Director or their designees are hereby authorized to execute any and all documents and/or implement any and all procedures necessary to effectuate the collection of such fees and to establish a separate fund for receipt and disbursement of funds generated from EMS billing in order to enhance services provided by the Fire Division of the City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(Ord. 34-02. Passed 7-25-2002.) 
Sec. 123.05. - Tax Administrator. 
(A)  The position of Tax Administrator shall be added to the organizational chart of the City of Marysville. This position shall be an unclassified position under the supervision of the Finance Director. 
(B)  The Tax Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
(C)  In addition to the duties and responsibilities set forth in Sections 141.09 and 141.10, the Tax Administrator will ensure income tax compliance and perform his/her duties in accordance with the job description. 
(Ord. 7-04. Passed 2-26-2004.) 
CHAPTER 125. - POLICE DIVISION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Impersonation of a peace officer,  525.03; unauthorized display of law enforcement emblems,  525.14. 
State Law reference- Police officer training certificate required for permanent Employment, ORC  109.77; Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund, ORC Ch. 742. 

Sec. 125.01. - Administrative fees. 
(A)  Fees shall be established and payment made for certain services provided by the Marysville Police Department. Such fees shall be for services such as copies of accident reports, statements, photographs, vehicle towing and storage, record checks and fingerprinting. 
(B)  The fees shall be established by the Director of Administration upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police. Said fees shall take effect thirty days after a list of such fees is provided to the Clerk of Council and to the extent practical shall be based upon the administrative time and actual cost incurred in providing such services. 
(C)  Such reports, statements and photographs, may, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be withheld until all criminal prosecution has been concluded. 
(Ord. 40-94. Passed 10-27-1994.) 
Sec. 125.02. - Waiver of fees. 
The fees in Section 125.01 may be waived for other law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. 40-94. Passed 10-27-1994.) 
Sec. 125.03. - Parking Regulations Officer: duties. 
(A)  The Mayor may appoint a Parking Regulations Officer whose duties shall be: 
(1)  To keep records of violations of Chapter 353 of these Codified Ordinances and to give notices of such violations. 
(2)  To collect money from parking meters. 
(3)  To maintain and repair all parking meters belonging to the City. 
(B)  The Parking Regulations Officer shall be a civilian employee of the Police Division, and shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police. 
(C)  The provisions of this section shall not affect the duty and power of the policemen to cite and arrest for parking meter violations. 
Sec. 125.04. - Auxiliary Police Force. 
(A)  Auxiliary Police Force Established. In order to maintain an adequate police force to preserve law and order in the time of any emergency or major disaster, there is hereby established within the Police Division, an auxiliary police force. The auxiliary shall be composed of trained and qualified volunteers, and shall supplement the regular Police Division, at any time that the Mayor or the Chief of Police may deem necessary. The unit, when organized, shall be known as the Marysville Police Auxiliary. 
(B)  Supervision; Training. The auxiliary shall be under the direct supervision and orders of the Chief of Police, who at all times shall be responsible for the unit's education and training program. The Chief shall designate an officer of the regular Police Division to be the training officer for the auxiliary. 
(C)  Appointment of Members. Members of the auxiliary shall be appointed by the Mayor and subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, and confirmed by Council. The members shall be citizens of the United States and a resident of Union County and may not be under eighteen years of age at the time of appointment. 
(D)  Officers; Police Duties. The Chief of Police or other officers of the Police Division designated by him, shall be the commanding officers of the auxiliary, and shall have full control of the assignment, training, qualification, stationing and direction of work of the auxiliary. Auxiliary policemen shall have all police powers, but shall perform only such police duties and shall act only when authorized to do so by the Chief, or the ranking police officer on duty at the time. The auxiliary members shall obey the chain of command of the Police Division and shall obey orders from all regular appointed officers thereof. 
(E)  Duties of the Chief of Police. 
(1)  The Chief of Police is authorized to prescribe the type of uniform, or portion thereof, which shall be worn by members of the auxiliary. 
(2)  The Chief of Police, subject to approval of the Mayor, shall prescribe the rules and regulations for the conduct, control, training, promotion and operation of the auxiliary. 
(3)  The Chief of Police, subject to approval of the Mayor, is hereby authorized and directed to issue the necessary executive orders, rules and regulations for the administration of the auxiliary. 
(F)  Liability. Neither the City nor agent, nor representative of the Municipality, nor any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, nor the receiver, nor trustee, nor any other agent thereof, who in good faith, executes any executive order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provision of the sections hereof, shall be liable for injury or damage sustained to persons or property as to the direct or proximate result of such action. 
Sec. 125.05. - Police protection to city-owned property located outside city limits. 
The City of Marysville, pursuant to ORC 715.50 hereby has the authority to provide police protection and to prosecute offenses that arise on City-owned property that is located outside its City limits. 
(Ord. 27-12. Passed 5-10-2012.) 
CHAPTER 127. - FIRE DIVISION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Arson,  541.02. 
State Law reference- Fire protection contracts, ORC 307.05, 505.44, 717.02; schooling, buildings and equipment, ORC 715.05, 737.23 et seq.; general duties, ORC 737.11. 

Sec. 127.01. - Personal nonliability of emergency squadmen. 
Any claim or suit brought against any member of the Fire Division, arising from or because of any action or inaction by such member in the scope of his employment as a member of an emergency squad, or other emergency unit on a medical assignment, operated by the Fire Division, shall be defended by the City until the final termination of the proceedings therein. The City shall save such member of the Fire Division harmless from personal liability or any judgment resulting from such claim or suit, unless the action or inaction of such member constitutes willful or wanton misconduct. 
(Ord. 959-75. Passed 1-23-1975.) 
Sec. 127.02. - Firefighting equipment; contracts. 
(A)  The Mayor and Fire Chief are authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the City with any other political subdivision providing for the mutual aid of firefighting equipment in the event of an emergency, subject to the approval of Council. 
(B)  The Fire Chief or any person in active charge of the Fire Division may authorize and send firefighting equipment and personnel to the fire districts of other political subdivisions when called upon by the proper official of such other subdivision in times of fire and emergency in such other subdivision, as provided by ORC 9.60. 
(C)  The Mayor and the Fire Chief are authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the City to provide fire protection within the County, subject to the approval of Council. 
(D)  No written contract shall be for longer than three years. 
(Ord. 51-85. Passed 8-29-1985.) 
Sec. 127.03. - Emergency squad. 
The Mayor and Fire Chief are authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the City to provide emergency medical services within Union County, subject to the approval of City Council. 
(Ord. 37-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 127.04. - Fire Investigator. 
(A)  There is established the positions of Fire Investigators within the City Fire Division. 
(B)  Fire Investigators shall be qualified members of the Fire Division and shall be appointed by the Fire Chief. 
(C)  A Fire Investigator shall be present at all fires, investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, and do and perform all other acts necessary to the effective discharge of such duties. 
(D)  Fire investigators may administer oaths, make arrests and enter, for the purpose of examination, any building which, in his opinion, is in danger from fire. 
(Ord. 37-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
CHAPTER 128. - DIVISION OF WATER[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish divisions, Charter  9.01. 
Cross reference- Water rules and regulations, Ch. 930. 

Sec. 128.01. - Established. 
(A)  The Division of Water is hereby created. 
(B)  The Division of Water shall consist of a Superintendent of Water and a Manager of Water Distribution reporting to the Superintendent, and such other employees as may be provided by ordinance or resolution. The Superintendent and Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall exercise direct supervision of the employees of the Division. 
(Ord. 20-91. Passed 4-11-1991.) 
CHAPTER 129. - DIVISION OF ENGINEERING[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Building standards, Ch. 1301. 

Sec. 129.01. - Composition; appointment of City Engineer. 
The Division of Engineering shall consist of a City Engineer and such other employees as may be provided by Council. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be a registered engineer, licensed to practice within the State. He shall supervise the Division and any persons in its employ. 
(Ord. 2-85. Passed 1-10-1985.) 
Sec. 129.02. - Powers and duties of City Engineer. 
(A)  The City Engineer has primary responsibility for the planning, construction and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, the wastewater treatment plant and the sanitary sewers. The City Engineer, under the general direction of the Director of Administration, is also responsible for the planning and construction of capital improvements relating to the cemetery, parks, buildings and pools. Capital improvement projects beyond the capability of the Division of Engineering's staff shall be designed by consulting engineers in consultation with the City Engineer. The City Engineer is also responsible for engineering, zoning and subdivision regulations and for construction inspections. 
(B)  The City Engineer has general coordinating responsibility for the Divisions of Waste Water Treatment, Streets and Storm Sewers, Public Service and Planning and Zoning. 
(Ord. 2-85. Passed 1-10-1985.) 
Sec. 129.03. - Enforcement section. 
The Enforcement Section of the Division of Engineering shall work under the City Engineer and shall include the Zoning Inspector and such other persons as are necessary to carry out the inspections required within the authority of the Division. 
(Ord. 2-85. Passed 1-10-1985.) 
CHAPTER 130. - DIVISION OF PUBLIC SERVICE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish divisions, Charter  9.01. 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, Ch. 941; public swimming pools,  1139.04. 

Sec. 130.01. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a Division of Public Service for the City. Such Division shall include a Public Service Director and such other employees as are authorized by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 34-86. Passed 10-9-1986.) 
Sec. 130.02. - Powers and duties. 
The Division of Public Service shall have responsibility for Municipal cemeteries, swimming pools, parks and recreation areas and activities, and buildings and grounds. 
(Ord. 34-86. Passed 10-9-1986.) 
Sec. 130.03. - Appointment of Public Service Director; duties. 
The Public Service Director shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Director's duties shall involve direct supervision of the employees of the Division of Public Service and its operations. 
(Ord. 34-86. Passed 10-9-1986.) 
CHAPTER 131. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Criminal mischief,  541.04; destruction of shrubs, trees or crops,  541.06; parks, Ch. 951. 

Sec. 131.01. - Established: compensation; powers and duties. 
(A)  Established. There is hereby created and established a Parks and Recreation Commission for the City, which Commission shall consist of the following seven members: a Council member appointed by the President of Council, a student member appointed by the Mayor from recommendations submitted by Marysville Exempted Village School District, and five residents who shall be appointed by the President of Council with the approval of Council. Public members shall represent all geographical sections of the City insofar as reasonable and practical. 
(B)  Term of Office. The term of the original Council member shall expire December 31, 1976, and thereafter appointments shall be for a term of three years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the President of Council for the unexpired portion of such term. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the President of Council, with the approval of Council, shall be two terms expiring November 30, 1983, and two terms expiring November 30, 1984, and one term expiring November 30, 1985. Thereafter each appointment shall be for three-year terms. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the President of Council and approved by the Council, for the unexpired portion of such term. 
The term of the student member shall be one year beginning on June 1 and ending on May 31. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor from the recommendations of the Marysville Exempted Village School District. 
(C)  Compensation. Members of the Commission shall receive such compensation as is set by Council. 
(D)  Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have the power to study, investigate, plan, advise and report to Council, the Director of Public Service or the Director of Administration any action, program, plan or legislation which the Commission finds or determines to be necessary to advisable for the effective operation and maintenance of public parks and recreation facilities for use of the residents of the City. The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The Clerk of Council shall be ex-officio secretary of the Commission. 
The term of the student member shall be one year beginning on June 1 and ending on May 31. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor from the recommendations of the Marysville Exempted Village School District. 
(C)  Compensation. Members of the Commission shall receive such compensation as is set by Council. 
(D)  Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have the power to study, investigate, plan, advise and report to Council, the Director of Public Service or the Director of Administration any action, program, plan or legislation which the Commission finds or determines to be necessary to advisable for the effective operation and maintenance of public parks and recreation facilities for use of the residents of the City. The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The Clerk of Council shall be ex-officio secretary of the Commission. 
(Ord. 21-88. Passed 9-22-1988; Ord. 52-96. Passed 9-26-1996.) 
CHAPTER 132. - PLANNING COMMISSION[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference- Established; composition, Charter  9.03.01. 

Sec. 132.01. - Terms and vacancies. 
(A)  The terms of office of the seven citizen members of the Planning Commission shall be overlapping terms of four years. 
(B)  In conformance with the 2001 Charter Amendments, the seven members at large shall be appointed by the Mayor to initial terms as follows: two members to a term ending March 31, 2002, one member to a term ending March 31, 2003, two members to a term ending March 31, 2004, two members to a term ending March 31, 2005. 
(Ord. 43-01. Passed 11-20-2001.) 
CHAPTER 135. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance 2-03, passed January 23, 2003, approved Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission. Copies of such Rules and Regulations may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council. 
Charter reference- Composition; duties, Charter  9.03.02. 
State Law reference- Civil Service laws, ORC Ch. 124. 

Sec. 135.01. - Civil Service Commission. 
(A)  The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three members appointed by City Council with approval of a majority of members of Council, to serve a term of six years, an appointment to fill interim vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the office. Members of the Commission shall not hold any other office in City government. The Commission shall elect one of its members as chairman, one as vice-chairman and one as secretary. 
(Ord. 19-15. Passed 6-25-2015.) 
Sec. 135.02. - Administration. 
The Civil Service Commission shall enforce the civil service laws and regulations applicable to the City. The Commission will coordinate with Human Resources who may act on behalf of the Commission in administering civil service laws and regulations, except where the authority is specifically reserved to the Commission. The Commission shall have the power to hear appeals regarding implementation of any civil service laws and regulations and policies. 
(Ord. 19-15. Passed 6-25-2015.) 
Sec. 135.03. - Suspension and removal. 
The City Manager may bring to City Council at any time grounds for the City Council to suspend or remove any Commission member for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, having first given to such member a copy of the charges setting forth the specific complaint. An opportunity shall be given each member to be publicly heard in person or by counsel in his own defense. Any Commission member so removed, may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, providing such appeal is taken within ten days from the decision of the City Council. 
(Ord. 19-15. Passed 6-25-2015.) 
Sec. 135.04. - Rules and regulations. 
(A)  The Civil Service Commission shall prescribe, amend and enforce rules not inconsistent with the City Charter for the classification of positions in the Civil Service of this City; for the conduct of testing and disposition of appeals. 
(B)  The rules or amendments thereto prescribed in accordance with subsection (A) hereof shall not become effective until approved by a majority vote of Council, or if no decision is taken by Council, then the proposed rules or amendments thereto shall become effective after sixty days after receipt by the Clerk of Council. In the event Council does not approve the proposed rules or amendments thereto it shall return them to the Commission with the reasons for disapproval. 
(Ord. 19-15. Passed 6-25-2015.) 
CHAPTER 139. - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 139.01. - Established. 
The City of Marysville Department of Building Regulations is hereby established under the Office of the Manager of Public Service. 
(Ord. 90-06. Passed 11-16-2006.) 
Sec. 139.02. - Powers. 
The Department shall operate through a contract with Union County and shall enforce all laws, statutes and regulations as provided and authorized in the Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio Administrative Code pursuant to the certification approved by the Ohio Board of Building Standards. 
(Ord. 90-06. Passed 11-16-2006.) 
CHAPTER 140. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Charter reference- Certain contracts prohibited, Charter  10.08; contracts and purchasing, Charter  10.11. 

Sec. 140.01. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms as used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(A)  Sole Source. A single provider, certified by the Director of Administration to reasonably be the only supplier of a particular good or service. 
(B)  Emergency. A situation, such as the need to quickly repair infrastructure or replace non-functioning equipment or parts that are essential for day-to-day City operations, which requires the City to proceed with procurement on an immediate basis and bypass the approved purchasing process. An emergency shall be certified in writing by the Director of Administration. 
(C)  Professional Services . A service provided by a licensed professional, qualified technician, individual, expert, or company to satisfy the professional needs as requested/required by the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 32-11. Passed 9-8-2011.) 
Sec. 140.02. - Contract authority. 
(A)  All purchases under the State of Ohio competitive bidding threshold as set forth in the ORC 735.05 shall be done pursuant to the administrative policy developed by the Director of Finance. 
(B)  All contracts in excess of the State of Ohio competitive bidding threshold as set forth in the ORC 735.05 shall be overseen by the Board of Control and are subject to the competitive bidding requirements as set forth in the ORC 735.05 with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Utilities; 
(2)  Purchases through the State of Ohio or centralized government purchasing organization; 
(3)  Purchase of used equipment or supplies at an auction open to the public or at a public sale requesting the submission of written bids; 
(4)  Emergency contracts; 
(5)  Other publicly bid opportunities; 
(6)  Professional services, such as legal, accounting, information technology, engineering, and insurance; 
(7)  IT upgrades of existing services/software; 
(8)  Sole Source; 
(9)  Land acquisition, easements or existing buildings. 
(Ord. 2-13. Passed 1-10-2013.) 
Sec. 140.03. - Prohibited bidder. 
The Director of Administration shall have the authority to declare a vendor or lessor a prohibited bidder who shall thereafter not be permitted to participate in the bidding procedure nor receive any business from the Municipality for a stated period of time, as deemed appropriate by the Director of Administration, not to exceed three (3) years, if the vendor: 
(A)  Has previously defaulted in its quotations to the City; 
(B)  Has failed to fulfill its obligations under a previous contract with or purchase by the City; 
(C)  Is presently disqualified from bidding or receiving any business from any other unit of local government within State of Ohio. 
(Ord. 32-11. Passed 9-8-2011.) 
Sec. 140.04. - Single prime. 
With respect to constructing public improvements, the Board of Control shall have the discretion to authorize contracts with as few as one contractor for the entire improvement. 
(Ord. 32-11. Passed 9-8-2011.) 
Sec. 140.05. - Professional services. 
The City of Marysville shall use a Quality Based Selection (QBS) Process in accordance with ORC 153.65 to 153.71 when selecting a professional consulting design/service firm. 
(A)  Pre-Qualified Procedures. 
(1)  The City will encourage professional design/service consultant firms to submit statements of qualifications (SOQ) for upcoming professional services. 
(2)  The City shall place a public notice requesting professional consulting design/service firms to submit a SOQ for the projects/services identified in the public notice. This notice for request for statements of qualifications (RFQ) for professional consulting design/services shall be a direct mailing to firms who have expressed an interest in providing professional design/services. The notice for the RFQ may also be placed on the City's web page. Said notice shall be placed at least two weeks before the SOQ is to be submitted to the City. 
(3)  The City shall receive the SOQ at City Hall on or before the date and time established in the public notice. 
(4)  The City shall evaluate the SOQ and establish a list of firms determined to be the most qualified to provide professional consulting design/services. The qualification's evaluation shall be based on the provisions set forth in Division (D) of ORC 153.65. 
(5)  When project needs arise, the City shall then request, from a minimum of three (3) prequalified firms, a technical approach, scope of services, and other details the City will use to evaluate and select the firm the City determines to be most qualified. Interviews may be required during evaluation of technical proposals. 
(6)  The City shall then negotiate a contract with the firm ranked by the City as most qualified. Should the City not be able to negotiate a contract with the firm ranked most qualified, then the City shall terminate the negotiations and enter into negotiations with the next most qualified firm. This negotiation process may continue and be requested until the City is able to successful negotiate a contract as provided for in Divisions (D) and (E) of ORC 153.69. 
(7)  The above procedures do not apply to professional design contracts where the estimated design fee is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) as set forth in Division (A) of ORC 153.71. This procedure may also be suspended when the Director of Administration determines an emergency exists as set forth in Division (B) of ORC 153.71. 
(8)  Qualifications shall be good for a period not to exceed three years. Firms can provide updated information if they feel it necessary and pertinent up to two times during the prequalification period. 
(B)  Areas of Prequalification. Engineering firms that are pre-qualified by the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) shall automatically be pre-qualified for the respective prequalification category. 
(1)  ODOT Prequalification Areas (can include but are not limited to): Non-Complex Highway Design, Complex Highway Design, Non-Complex Structure Design, Complex Structure Design, Minor Bridge Inspection, Subsurface and Foundation Design, Traffic Signal Design, Traffic Signal System Design, Construction Inspection, Right-of-way Plan Development, Appraisal and Title Services, Highway Environmental Studies, Environmental Site Assessments, Geotechnical/Testing Services. 
(2)  Additional Prequalification Areas (not necessarily prequalified by ODOT, that shall be prequalified as set forth above): 
(a)  Civil Engineering. 
i.  Transportation Studies (Traffic Impact Analysis); 
ii.  Storm Water Management/Design; 
iii.  Water Systems Design; 
iv.  Sanitary Sewer Systems Design; 
v.  Construction Management Services; 
vi.  Professional Surveying Services. 
(Ord. 32-11. Passed 9-8-2011.) 
Sec. 140.06. - General. 
In the event that questions arise in regards to the above sections and/or procedures, the Board of Control shall have final authority. 
(Ord. 32-11. Passed 9-8-2011.) 
TITLE SEVEN - TAXATION 
CHAPTER 141. - INCOME TAX[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Charter reference- Collection by Director of Finance, Charter  7.02; limitation on levying, charter  10.01. 
State Law reference- Payroll deductions, ORC 9.42; municipal income taxes, ORC Ch. 718. 
State Constitution reference- Power to levy, Ohio Const., Art. XII, Sec. 8; 

Sec. 141.01. - Purpose. 
To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations, street maintenance and construction, new equipment and capital improvements, there shall be and is hereby levied a tax on qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits and other taxable income as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  As used in this chapter the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except as and if the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(1)  Adjusted federal taxable income means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(a)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income; 
(b)  Add an amount equal to five percent (5%) of intangible income deducted under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(c)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(d)  i.  Except as provided in subsection (A)(1)(d)ii., of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
ii.  Subsection (A)(1)(d)ii. of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(e)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(f)  In the case of a real estate investment trust and regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(g)  If the taxpayer is not a C corporation and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except: 
i.  Guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense; and 
ii.  Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to an owner or owner-employee of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for an owner or owner-employee, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for an owner or owner-employee shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
Nothing in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting or removing the ability of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax. 
(2)  Association means a partnership, limited partnership, S corporation or any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned by one or more persons. 
(3)  Board of Income Tax Appeal (Board of Appeals, Board of Adjudication, etc.) means the Board created by and constituted as provided for in Section 141.14. 
(4)  Business means an enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership, fiduciary, trust, association, corporation or any other entity, including but not limited to the renting or leasing of property, real, personal or mixed. 
(5)  Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or dependency. 
(6)  Domicile means a principal residence that the taxpayer intends to use for an indefinite time and to which whenever he is absent he intends to return. A taxpayer has only one domicile even though he may have more than one residence. 
(7)  Employee means one who works for wages, salary, commission or other types of compensation in the services of an employer. 
(8)  Employer means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized for profits, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis. 
(9)  Fiscal year means an accounting period of twelve (12) months or less ending on any day other than December 31. 
(10)  Form 2106 means Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(11)  Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income means Internal Revenue Service Form 1099-MISC filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(12)  Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings means Internal Revenue Service Form W-2G filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(13)  Form 5754, Statement by Person(s) Receiving Gambling Winnings means Internal Revenue Service Form 5754 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(14)  Generic form means an electronic or paper form designed for reporting estimated municipal income taxes and annual municipal income tax liability or for filing a refund claim that is not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation for the reporting of that municipal corporation's tax on income. 
(15)  Gross receipts means total income of taxpayers from whatever source derived. 
(16)  Income from a pass-through entity means partnership income of partners, membership interests of members of a limited liability company, distributive shares of shareholders of an S corporation, or other distributive or proportionate ownership shares of income from other pass-through entities. 
(17)  Intangible income means income of any of the following types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined in Chapter 5701 of the Ohio Revised Code, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. Intangible income does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings or other similar games of chance. 
(18)  Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended. 
(19)  Internet means the international computer network of both Federal and nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical sub network known as the World Wide Web. 
(20)  Joint Economic Development District means districts created under the ORC 715.70-715.83, as amended from time to time. 
(21)  Limited liability company means a limited liability company formed under ORC Ch. 1705 or under the laws of another state. 
(22)  Municipality means the City of Marysville. 
(23)  Net profit for a taxpayer other than an individual means adjusted federal taxable income and net profit for a taxpayer who is an individual means the individual's profit, other than amounts described in subsection (F) of Section 141.03, required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or schedule F. 
(24)  Nonqualified deferred compensation plan means a compensation plan described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(25)  Non-resident means an individual domiciled outside the Municipality. 
(26)  Non-resident incorporated business entity means an incorporated business entity not having an office or place of business within the Municipality. 
(27)  Non-resident unincorporated business entity means an unincorporated business entity not having an office or place of business within the Municipality. 
(28)  Other payer means any person, other than an individual's employer or the employer's agent that pays an individual any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. 
(29)  Owner means a partner of a partnership, a member of a limited liability company, a shareholder of an S corporation, or other person with an ownership interest in a pass-through entity. 
(30)  Owner's proportionate share , with respect to each owner of a pass-through entity, means the ratio of: 
(a)  The owner's income from the pass-through entity that is subject to taxation by the municipal corporation, to: 
(b)  The total income from that entity of all owners whose income from the entity is subject to taxation by that municipal corporation. 
(31)  Pass-through entity means a partnership, Limited Liability Company, S corporation, or any other class of entity the income or profits from which are given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(32)  Person includes individuals, firms, companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity. 
(33)  Place of business means any bona fide office, other than a mere statutory office, factory, warehouse, or other space, which is occupied and used by the taxpayer in carrying on any business activity, individually or through one or more of his regular employees regularly in attendance. 
(34)  Principal place of business means in the case of an employer having headquarters' activities at a place of business within a taxing municipality, the place of business at which the headquarters is situated. In the case of any employer not having its headquarters' activities at a place of business within a taxing municipality, the term means the largest place of business located in a taxing municipality. 
(35)  Qualified plan means a retirement plan satisfying the requirements under section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code as amended. 
(36)  Qualifying wages means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted in accordance with ORC 718.03(A). 
(37)  Resident means an individual domiciled in the Municipality. 
(38)  Resident incorporated business entity means an incorporated business entity whose office; place or operations or business situs is within the Municipality. 
(39)  Resident unincorporated business entity means an unincorporated business entity having an office or place of business within the Municipality. 
(40)  Return preparer means any person other than a taxpayer that is authorized by a taxpayer to complete or file an income tax return, report, or other document for or on behalf of the taxpayer. 
(41)  Schedule C means Internal Revenue Service schedule C filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(42)  Schedule E means Internal Revenue Service schedule E filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(43)  Schedule F means Internal Revenue Service schedule F filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(44)  S corporation means a corporation that has an election under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year. 
(45)  Tax Administrator means the person appointed to administer the Municipality's Income Tax Ordinance and to direct the operation of the municipal income tax Department or the person executing the duties of the Tax Administrator. This term may include the Finance Director or his appointed designee. 
(46)  Taxable income means qualifying wages paid by an employer or employers, compensation for personal services, other income defined by statute as taxable, and/or adjusted federal taxable income from the operation of a business, profession, or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(47)  Taxable year means the corresponding tax-reporting period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code. In the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is required to be made. 
(48)  Taxing municipality means a municipality levying a tax on income earned by Non-residents working within such municipality or on income earned by its residents. 
(49)  Taxpayer means a person subject to a tax on income levied by a municipal corporation. Taxpayer does not include any person that is a disregarded entity or a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary for federal income tax purposes, but taxpayer includes any other person who owns the disregarded entity or qualifying subchapter S subsidiary. 
(B)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and all periods set forth shall be inclusive of the first and last mentioned dates. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.03. - Imposition of tax. 
(A)  Basis of Imposition. Subject to provisions of Section 141.01, an annual tax shall be, and is hereby, levied on and after July 1, 2010, at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.50%) per annum upon the following: 
(1)  On all qualifying wages, salaries, including sick, vacation, severance and any pay as part of an employee buyout or wage continuation plan, commissions, prize moneys, tips and gratuities, other compensation, and other taxable income earned or received by residents of the Municipality; 
(2)  On all qualifying wages, salaries, including sick, vacation, severance and any pay as part of an employee buyout or wage continuation plan commissions, tips and gratuities, other compensation, and other taxable income earned or received by Non-residents for work done, or services performed or rendered, in the Municipality; 
(3)  On the portion attributable to the Municipality of the net profits earned by all resident unincorporated businesses, pass-through entities, professions or other activities, derived from work done or services performed or rendered, and business or other activities conducted in the Municipality. On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned by a resident owner of a resident unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity not attributable to the Municipality and not levied against such unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity; 
(4)  On the portion attributable to the Municipality on the net profits by all Non-resident unincorporated businesses, pass-through entities, professions or other activities, derived from work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the Municipality, whether or not such unincorporated business entity has an office or place of business in the Municipality. On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned by a resident owner of a Non-resident unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity not attributable to the Municipality and not levied against such unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity; 
(5)  On the portion attributable to the Municipality of the net profits earned by all corporations that are not pass-through entities from work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the Municipality, whether or not such corporations have an office or place of business in the Municipality; 
(6)  On all income received as gambling winnings as reported on IRS Form W-2G, Form 5754 and or any other Form required by the Internal Revenue Service that reports winnings from gambling, prizes and lottery winnings; 
(B)  Businesses Both In and Outside the Municipal Boundaries. This section does not apply to taxpayers that are subject to and required to file reports under Chapter 5745, of the Ohio Revised Code. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be considered as having a taxable situs in such municipal corporation for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  Multiply the entire net profits of the business by a business apportionment percentage to be determined by: 
(a)  The average original cost of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in such municipal corporation during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; 
As used in the preceding paragraph, real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(b)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed in such municipal corporation to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their services are performed, excluding compensation that is not taxable by the municipal corporation under ORC 718.011; 
(c)  Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and services performed during the taxable period in such municipal corporation to gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales and services, wherever made or performed; 
(d)  Adding together the percentages determined in accordance with subsections (B)(1)(a)-(c) hereof, or such of the aforesaid percentages as are applicable to the particular taxpayer and dividing the total so obtained by the number of percentages used in deriving such total; 
i.  A factor is applicable even though it may be apportioned entirely in or outside the Municipality; 
ii.  Provided however, that in the event a just and equitable result cannot be obtained under the formula provided for herein, the Tax Administrator, upon application of the taxpayer, shall have the authority to substitute other factors or methods calculated to effect a fair and proper apportionment. 
(C)  As used in subsection (B) of this section, sales made in a municipal corporation mean: 
(1)  All sales of tangible personal property delivered within such municipal corporation regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of goods within such municipal corporation; 
(2)  All sales of tangible personal property delivered within such municipal corporation regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point outside such municipal corporation if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion; 
(3)  All sales of tangible personal property shipped from a place within such municipal corporation to purchasers outside such municipal corporation regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (E) of this section, net profit from rental activity not constituting a business or profession shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located. 
(E)  This section does not apply to individuals who are residents of the Municipality and, except as otherwise provided in ORC 718.01, the Municipality may impose a tax on all income earned by residents of the Municipality to the extent allowed by the United States Constitution. 
(F)  Net Operating Loss (NOL). 
(1)  The Municipality does not allow a net operating loss carryback or carryforward. 
(2)  The net loss from an unincorporated business activity may not be used to offset salaries, wages, commissions (to the extent that they are reported on form W-2) or other compensation. However, if a taxpayer is engaged in two or more taxable business activities to be included in the same return, the net loss of one unincorporated business activity (except any portion of a loss reportable for municipal income tax purposes to another municipality) may be used to offset the profits of another for purposes of arriving at overall net profits. 
(G)  Consolidated Returns. 
(1)  A consolidated return may be filed by a group of corporations who are affiliated through stock ownership if that affiliated group filed for the same tax period a consolidated return for Federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. A consolidated return must include all companies that are so affiliated. 
(H)  Exclusions. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as levying a tax upon the following: 
(1)  Proceeds from welfare benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, social security benefits, and qualified retirement plans as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(2)  Proceeds of insurance, annuities, workers' compensation insurance, permanent disability benefits, compensation for damages for personal injury and like reimbursements, not including damages for loss of profits and wages. 
(3)  Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable, religious, educational organizations, or labor unions, trade or professional associations, lodges and similar organizations. 
(4)  Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness, interest on Federal obligations and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration (except such income from the operation of a business). 
(5)  Alimony. 
(6)  Compensation for damage to property by way of insurance or otherwise. 
(7)  Interest and dividends from intangible property. 
(8)  Military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and of members of their reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. 
(ORC 718.01) 
(9)  Income of any charitable, educational, fraternal or other type of non-profit association or organization enumerated in ORC 718.01 to the extent that such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-exempt activities. 
(10)  Any association or organization falling in the category listed in the preceding paragraph receiving income from non-exempt real estate, tangible or intangible personal property, or business activities of a type ordinarily conducted for profit by taxpayers operating for profit shall not be excluded hereunder. 
(11)  In the event any association or organization receives taxable income as provided in the preceding paragraph from real or personal property ownership or income producing business located both within and without the corporate limits of the Municipality, it shall calculate its income apportioned to the Municipality under the method or methods provided above. 
(12)  If exempt for federal income tax purposes, fellowship and scholarship grants are excluded from municipal income tax. 
(13)  The rental value of a home furnished to a minister of the gospel as part of his compensation, or the rental allowance paid to a minister of the gospel as part of his compensation, to the extent used by him to rent or provide a home pursuant to Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(14)  Compensation paid under ORC 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person serving as a precinct official, to the extent that such compensation does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. Such compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be subjected to taxation. The payer of such compensation is not required to withhold Municipal tax from that compensation. 
(15)  Compensation paid to an employee of a transit authority, regional transit authority, or a regional transit commission created under ORC Ch. 306 for operating a transit bus or other motor vehicle for the authority or commission in or through the Municipality, unless the bus or vehicle is operated on a regularly scheduled route, the operator is subject to such tax by reason of residence or domicile in the Municipality, or the headquarters of the authority or commission is located within the Municipality. 
(16)  The Municipality shall not tax the compensation paid to a Non-resident individual for personal services performed by the individual in the Municipality on twelve (12) or fewer days in a calendar year unless one of the following applies: 
(a)  The individual is an employee of another person, the principal place of business of the individual's employer is located in another municipality in Ohio that imposes a tax applying to compensation paid to the individual for services paid on those days; and the individual is not liable to that other municipality for tax on the compensation paid for such services. 
(b)  The individual is a professional entertainer or professional athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports event, or an employee of such promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the Municipality. 
(17)  The income of a public utility, when that public utility is subject to the tax levied under ORC 5727.24 or 5727.30, except a municipal corporation may tax the following, subject to ORC 5745: 
(a)  The income of an electric company or combined company; 
(b)  The income of a telephone company. 
As used in subsection (F)(17) of this section, combined company , electric company , and telephone company have the same meanings as in ORC 5727.01. 
(18)  An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net profits that represents wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, to the extent such distributive share would not be allocated or apportioned to this state under subsection (B)(1) and (2) of ORC 5733.0 if the S corporation were a corporation subject to the taxes imposed under ORC Ch. 5733. 
(19)  Personal earnings of any person under eighteen years of age. In the event that income tax was erroneously withheld or paid to the City of Marysville, amounts of less than five dollars and one cent ($5.01) shall not be refunded. 
(20)  On the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of income received by an individual with a developmental disability employed by a sheltered workshop operated in accordance with rules, regulations, and standards set by the Department of Developmental Disabilities. 
(21)  Generally the above noted items in this section are the only forms of income not subject to the tax. Any other income, benefits, or other forms of compensation shall be taxable. 
(Ord. 20-10. Passed 6-24-2010; Ord. 5-12. Passed 2-19-2012.) 
Sec. 141.04. - Effective period. 
Said tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned and shall be levied with respect to the net profits of the businesses, professional or other activities earned from and after the effective date of this Tax Code. Said tax shall continue in effect for an indefinite period. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.05. - Allocation of funds. 
The funds collected under this chapter shall be applied for the following purposes and in the following order: 
(A)  Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of collecting the taxes levied by this chapter, and enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(B)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of street maintenance, construction and repair. 
(C)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of general Municipal operations. 
(D)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of new equipment and capital improvements. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.06. - Return and payment of tax. 
(A)  On or before April 15 of each year, every resident subject to the provisions of Section 141.03(A)-(H) inclusive, shall, except hereinafter provided, make and file with the Tax Administrator a Municipal tax return on a form prescribed by and acceptable to the Tax Administrator, whether or not a tax is due. When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different from the calendar year, the return shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of such fiscal year or period. The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to provide by regulation that the return of an employer or employers, showing the amount of Municipal tax deducted by said employer or employers from the qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and other taxable income of a Non-resident employee, and paid by him or them to the Tax Administrator may be accepted as the return required of a Non-resident employee whose sole income, subject to tax under this Tax Code, is such qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and other taxable income. 
(B)  A husband and wife may file either separate returns or a joint return for municipal purposes, even though one of the spouses has neither taxable income nor deductions included on the Municipal return regardless of whether their federal and state returns were filed separately or jointly. If a joint city return is made, the tax shall be computed on the aggregate taxable income and the liability with respect to the tax shall be joint and several. 
(C)  The return shall be filed with the Tax Administrator on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request from the Tax Administrator; or on a generic form, if the generic form, when completed and filed, contains all of the information required to be submitted with the Municipality's prescribed return and, if the taxpayer or return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the Tax Code governing the filing of returns. 
(D)  The return shall set forth: 
(1)  The aggregate amounts of qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation received, allocated, apportioned or set aside, other income defined by statute as taxable, and gross income from any business, profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such gross income earned during the preceding year and subject to said tax; 
(2)  The amount of the tax imposed by this Tax Code on such earnings and profits; and 
(3)  Such other pertinent statements, information returns, copies of federal or state tax returns and/or schedules, or other information as the Tax Administrator may require, including a statement that the figures used in the return are the figures used for federal income tax adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable under the provisions of this chapter. 
(E)  (1)  Any taxpayer that has requested an extension for filing a federal income tax return may request an extension for the filing of a Municipal Income Tax Return by filing a copy of the taxpayer's federal extension request with the Municipal Tax Division. Any taxpayer not required to file a federal income tax return may request an extension for filing a Municipal Income Tax Return in writing. The request for extension must be filed on or before the original due date for the annual return. If the request is granted, the extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the last day of the month following the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return has been extended. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator may deny a taxpayer's request for extension if the taxpayer: 
(a)  Fails to timely file the request; 
(b)  Fails to file a copy of the federal extension request, (if applicable); 
(c)  Owes the Municipality any delinquent income tax, penalty, interest or other charge for the late payment or nonpayment of income tax; or 
(d)  Has failed to file any required income tax return, report, or other related document for a prior tax period. 
(3)  The granting of an extension for filing a Municipal tax return does not extend the due date as provided in this section for payment of the tax; hence, penalty and interest may apply to any unpaid tax during the period of extension at the rate set out by Section 141.11. No penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax paid within the extension period provided all other filing and payment requirements of the Tax Code have been met. Any extension by the Tax Administrator shall be granted upon the condition that declaration filing and payment requirements have been fulfilled; however, if, upon further examination it then becomes evident that declaration filing and payment requirements have not been fulfilled, penalty and interest may be assessed in full and in the same manner as though no extension had been granted. 
(F)  Payments with Returns. 
(1)  The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of the filing thereof, pay to the Tax Administrator the amount of taxes shown as due. However, credit shall be allowed for: 
(a)  Any portion of the tax so due which shall have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of Section 141.07; and 
(b)  Any portion of said tax which shall have been paid by the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of Section 141.08. 
(2)  Subject to the limitations contained in Section 141.12 of this Tax Code, any taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the Municipality is entitled under the provisions of this Tax Code may have such overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his election indicated on the return, such overpayment (or part thereof) shall be refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than five dollars and one cent ($5.01) shall be collected or refunded. 
(G)  Amended Returns. 
(1)  Where necessary, an amended return shall be filed in order to report additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in Section 141.12. The Tax Administrator shall provide by regulation the format in which such amended return shall be filed. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return. 
(2)  Within three (3) months from the final determination of any federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's Municipal tax liability, such taxpayer shall make and file an amended Municipal return showing income subject to the Municipal tax based upon such final determination of federal tax liability and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or make claim for refund of any overpayment. 
(H)  Information returns, schedules and statements required to support tax returns which are incomplete without such information shall be filed within the time limits set forth for the filing of the tax returns and the failure to file such information returns, schedules and statements shall be a violation of this Tax Code. Provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have ten (10) days after notification by the Tax Administrator, or his authorized representative, to file the items required by this paragraph. 
(I)  The payors of dishonored checks returned unpaid shall be charged twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover processing costs. 
(Ord. 31-11. Passed 9-8-2011; Ord. 5-12. Passed 2-19-2012; Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004; Ord. 65-04. Passed 12-16-2004; Ord. 11-18 . Passed 2-26-2018.) 
Sec. 141.07. - Collection at source. 
(A)  Withholding by Employer. Each employer within, or doing business within, the Municipality who employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis shall deduct, when such salary, wage, commission or other compensation is paid, allocated, apportioned or set aside, the tax at the rate provided in Section 141.03 hereof on the qualifying wages due by such employer to each such employee and shall, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following such withholding, make a return and pay to the Tax Administrator the amount of taxes so deducted. The return shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or acceptable to the Tax Administrator and shall be subject to the Rules and Regulations prescribed by the Tax Administrator. Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld whether or not such taxes have in fact been withheld. Nothing in this section prohibits an employer from withholding tax on a basis greater than qualifying wages. 
(B)  An employer is not required to make any withholding with respect to an individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued. 
(C)  (1)  An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the failure of the employer to withhold the tax as required by a municipal corporation or by the employer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax. 
(2)  The failure of an employer to remit to the municipal corporation the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld. 
(D)  Compensation deferred before the effective date of this amendment is not subject to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed. 
(E)  So long as the taxes withheld by an employer for the Municipality during the measurement period are less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, payments may be made quarterly on or before the last day of the month following the end of each quarter, subject to the approval of the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may revoke the approval of quarterly filing and payments whenever the Tax Administrator has reason to believe that the conditions for granting such authorization have changed, were judged incorrectly, were not met, or when it is in the best interest of the Municipality to do so. Notice of withdrawal shall be made in writing and, in such case; the employer must begin to file in accordance with this section. 
(F)  Employer Considered as Trustee. Each employer in collecting such tax shall be deemed to hold the same, until payment is made by such employer to the Municipality, as a trustee for the benefit of the Municipality, and any such tax collected by such employer from his employees shall, until the same is paid to the Municipality, be deemed a trust fund in the hands of such employer. Each employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld whether or not such tax, in fact, has been withheld. 
(G)  Any person who is required to withhold tax from qualifying wages shall pay all such tax to the Municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section. In the event taxes withheld from the qualifying wages of employees are not paid to the Municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section, all officers, members, managers, employees, and trustees having control or supervision of or charged with the responsibility of filing the return and making payment are jointly and severally personally liable for the tax not returned or paid to the Municipality as well as any related interest and penalties, and are also liable under the provisions of Section 141.13 hereof. The dissolution, termination, or bankruptcy of a corporation, limited liability company, or business trust does not discharge an officer's, member's, manager's, employee's, or trustee's liability for a failure of the corporation, limited liability company, or business trust to file returns or pay said taxes. 
(H)  Withholding Return; List of Employees. Each employer shall file a withholding tax reconciliation showing the sum total of all compensation paid all employees, the portion of which, (if any) was not subject to withholding along with an explanation for same, and the portion of which was subject to withholding, together with the amount of such withholdings remitted. Such return shall include information concerning each employee from whom the Municipal tax was withheld, showing the name, address, zip code and social security number of each such employee, the total amount of compensation paid during the year and the amount of Municipal tax withheld. If the total tax withheld from any employee-included tax withheld and remitted to another municipality, the amount of same shall be separately shown on the return of information to the Municipality concerning each employee. The withholding tax reconciliation shall be filed by each employer on or before February 28 following the end of such calendar year. 
(I)  In addition to the wage reporting requirements of this section, any person required by the Internal Revenue Service to report on Form 1099-Misc. payments to individuals not treated, as employees for services performed shall also report such payments to the Municipality when the services were performed in the Municipality. The information may be submitted on a listing, and shall include the name, address and social security number (or federal identification number), and the amount of the payments made. Federal form(s) 1099 may be submitted in lieu of such listing. The information shall be filed annually on or before February 28 following the end of such calendar year. 
(J)  Domestic Servants. No person shall be required to withhold the tax on the qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and other taxable income paid domestic servants employed exclusively in or about such person's residence. However, such domestic servants shall be responsible for filing and paying their own returns and taxes. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.08. - Declarations of estimated tax. 
(A)  Requirement for Filing. Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to Section 141.07 or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity subject to the tax imposed by Section 141.03, shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the estimated profit or loss from such business activity together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any. Provided, however, if a person's income is wholly from qualifying wages from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to this Municipality in accordance with Section 141.07, such person need not file a declaration. 
(B)  Dates for Filing. 
(1)  Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the life of this chapter, or on or before the fifteenth (15 ) day of the fourth (4) month following the date the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(2)  Those taxpayers having a fiscal year or period differing from the calendar year shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth (15) day of the fourth (4) month following the start of each fiscal year or period. 
(C)  Forms. 
(1)  Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by or obtainable from the Tax Administrator or an acceptable generic form, and credit shall be taken for the Municipal tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. 
(2)  The original declaration (or any subsequent amendment thereof) may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as provided for herein. 
(3)  For taxpayers who are individuals, such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the Municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the estimated annual tax and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before the last day of the seventh, tenth and thirteenth months after the beginning of the taxable year. 
(4)  For taxpayers that are not individuals, such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the Municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the estimated annual tax and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before the fifteenth (15) day of the sixth, ninth and twelfth months after the beginning of the taxable year. 
(5)  The mere submission of a declaration estimating a tax liability shall not constitute filing unless accompanied by the required payment. 
(D)  Amended Declaration . 
(1)  A declaration may be amended at any time. 
(2)  In the event that an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. 
(E)  Annual Return Required . On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the calendar or fiscal year, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due the Municipality shall be paid therewith in accordance with the provisions of Section 141.06. 
(F)  Estimated Tax Less Than $100.00. An entity (individual, corporate or association) may pay 100% of the prior year's tax in four equal installments in the current year and avoid any underpayment of estimated tax penalty. Prior year tax of zero or a prior year loss will not avoid penalty. No penalty for failure to pay estimated tax will apply to an entity whose tax for the year, after credit for tax withheld, is less than $100.00. A declaration of estimated tax which is less than 90% of the tax shown to be due on the final return shall not be considered in good faith. The difference shall be subject to penalties and interest as provided for in Section 141.11(A) and (B). 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004; Ord. 65-04. Passed 12-16-2004.) 
Sec. 141.09. - Appointment and duties of Tax Administrator. 
(A)  (1)  It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect and receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed therein, to keep an accurate record thereof, and to report all monies so received. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to enforce payment of all income taxes owing the Municipality, to keep accurate records for a minimum of five (5) years, showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration or make any return, including a return of taxes withheld, and to show the dates and amounts of payments thereof. 
(B)  The Tax Administrator is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of the Board of Income Tax Appeal, to adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns. 
(C)  In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Tax Administrator may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the Municipality from the taxpayer and may send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any. 
(D)  The Director is authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes, interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments when the taxpayer has proved to the Director that, due to certain hardship conditions, he is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall not be granted until the taxpayer files proper returns for all amounts owed by him under this chapter. 
(E)  Upon the demonstration and documentation of good cause, the Tax Administrator shall have the power to compromise penalty and interest liabilities imposed by this chapter, consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.10. - Investigative powers of Tax Administrator; penalty for divulging confidential information. 
(A)  The Tax Administrator, or any of his authorized agents, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or any person subject to, or whom the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax or withholdings due under this chapter. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to furnish, upon written request of the Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunities for making such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. 
(B)  The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person, presumed to have knowledge of the facts, to appear at the office of the Tax Administrator and to examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been reported for taxation, or withheld, or any transaction tending to affect such income, and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and federal income tax returns, and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry. 
(C)  The refusal to produce books, papers, records or federal income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by any employer or person subject, or presumed to be subject, to the tax or by any officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section or with an order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable as provided in Section 141.13. 
(D)  Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his tax liability for a period of five (5) years from the date his return is filed or the taxes, required to be withheld are paid. 
(E)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential and no person shall disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the official business of the municipal corporation as authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation may furnish copies of returns filed under this chapter to the Internal Revenue Service and to the State Tax Commissioner. 
(F)  Any person divulging such information shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. 
(G)  In addition to the above penalty, any employee of the Municipality who violates the provisions of this section relative to the disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty of an offense punishable in accordance with Policy 300 of the City Policy Manual up to and including termination of employment. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.11. - Interest and penalties. 
(A)  All taxes imposed and monies withheld or required to be withheld by employers under the provisions of this Tax Code and remaining unpaid after they become due shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of the unpaid tax, at the rate of two percent (2%) per month or fraction thereof. 
(B)  In addition to interest as provided in subsection (A) hereof, penalties are hereby imposed as follows based on the tax remaining unpaid after it becomes due: 
(1)  For failure to pay taxes due, other than taxes withheld, ten percent (10%) of the taxes due. 
(2)  For failure to remit taxes withheld or required to be withheld from employees; ten percent (10%) of the taxes due. 
(3)  Where the taxpayer has failed to file a declaration on which he has estimated and paid a tax equal to or greater than the tax paid for the previous year, or where he has filed a previous return and has failed to file a declaration on which he has estimated and paid a tax equal to or greater than ninety percent (90%) of the actual tax for the year, or has failed to file a return and paid the total tax on or before the end of the month following the end of the taxable year; ten percent (10%) of the difference between ninety percent (90%) of the actual tax for the year and the amount paid through withholding and declaration. 
(4)  No penalty or interest shall be charged against a taxpayer for the late payment or nonpayment of estimated tax liability if the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipal corporation but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the current calendar year. 
(5)  Except in the case of fraud, the penalty shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the unpaid tax. 
(C)  Exceptions. A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by the Tax Administrator when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Tax Administrator; and provided further that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three (3) months after the final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(D)  Computed penalties of less than five dollars ($5.00) for a first violation shall not be assessed. However, notification to the taxpayer of a first time violation will be made. 
(E)  Upon recommendation of the Tax Administrator, the Board of Income Tax Appeal may abate penalty or interest, or both, or upon an appeal from the refusal of the Tax Administrator to recommend abatement of penalty and interest concerning an item of income or expense, the Board may nevertheless abate penalty or interest, or both. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.12. - Collection of unpaid taxes and refunds of overpayments. 
(A)  All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any interest and penalties thereon, by suit as other debts of like amount are recoverable. No additional assessment shall be made after three (3) years from the time the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later; provided however, there shall be no period of limitation on an additional assessment in a case of a return that omits gross income in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of that required to be reported or in the case of filing a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, or in the case of failure to file a return. In those cases in which the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of limitations the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the Tax Administrator shall be extended one (1) year from the time of the final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(B)  Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is made within three (3) years from the date on which such payment was made or the return was due, or within three (3) months after final determination of the federal tax liability, whichever is later. 
(C)  Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment, with the following exception: No interest shall be allowed on any overpayment that is refunded within ninety (90) days after the final filing date of the annual return or ninety (90) days after the complete return is filed, whichever is later. For purposes of computing the payment of interest on overpayments, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be treated as having been paid before the date on which the tax return for that year was due without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. The interest shall be paid at the rate of interest prescribed by ORC 5703.47. 
(D)  Amounts of less than five dollars and one cent ($5.01) shall not be collected or refunded. 
(Ord. 31-11. Passed 9-8-2011; Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.13. - Violations and penalties. 
(A)  Any person who shall: 
(1)  Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter; 
(2)  Knowingly make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return; 
(3)  Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter; 
(4)  Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his employees and remit such withholding tax to the Tax Administrator; 
(5)  Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his or his employer's books, records, papers, or federal income tax returns; 
(6)  Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or his employer's books, records, papers or federal income tax returns upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; 
(7)  Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with respect to such person's or such person's employer's income or net profits; 
(8)  Willfully give to an employer by an employee false information as to his true name, correct social security number and residence address, or the failure of such employee to promptly notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; 
(9)  Failure on the part of any employer to maintain proper records of employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and Municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax Administrator false information; 
(10)  Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; 
(11)  Willfully fail or willfully refuse to make any payment on the estimated tax for any year or part of any tax year as required by Section 141.08; 
(12)  Fail to cause the tax withheld from the qualifying wages of the employees pursuant to this chapter to be paid to the Municipality in accordance with the provisions of Section 141.07; or 
(13)  Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter; for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); on a second offense within two years after the first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty (60) days, or both, for each offense; on each subsequent tax code violation within two years after the first offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and punished as provided for herein. 
(B)  The failure of any employer or taxpayer or person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other required form shall not excuse him from making any information return, return or declaration, from filing such form or from paying the tax. 
(C)  Statute of Limitations. 
(1)  Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within three (3) years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later. 
(2)  Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this chapter shall be commenced within three (3) years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six (6) years after the commission of the offense. 
(ORC 718.12) 
(D)  The failure of any employer, taxpayer or person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other required form shall not excuse him from making any information return, return or declaration, from filing such form, or from paying the tax. 
(E)  The term "person" as used in this section shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in Section 141.02, include in the case of an association or corporation not having any partner, member or officer within the Municipality, any employee or agent of such association or corporation who can be found within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.14. - Board of income tax appeal. 
(A)  A Board of Income Tax Appeal, hereinafter the Board, consisting of the City Administrator, the Finance Director, and three members of the public, to be appointed by the Mayor, is hereby created and shall be maintained to hear appeals. The members of the Board of Income Tax Appeal shall be appointed for a term of three; however, the members of the first Board of Income Tax Appeal shall be appointed for (one, two and three years respectively). A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its transactions. Any hearing by the Board shall be conducted privately and the provisions of Section 141.10 with reference to the confidential character of information required to be disclosed by the Chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before the Board on appeal. 
(B)  Whenever the Tax Administrator issues a decision regarding an income tax obligation that is subject to appeal as provided in this section, or in an ordinance or regulation of the Municipality, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the taxpayer's right to appeal the decision and of the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the decision. 
(C)  Any person who is aggrieved by a decision by the Tax Administrator and who has filed with the Municipality the required returns or other documents pertaining to the municipal income tax obligation at issue in the decision may appeal the decision to the Board of Income Tax Appeal by filing a request with the Board. The request shall be in writing, shall state with particularity why the decision should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the Tax Administrator has issued the decision. 
(D)  The imposition of penalty and interest as prescribed in the Codified Ordinance of the Municipality is not a sole basis for an appeal. 
(E)  The Board of Income Tax Appeal shall schedule a hearing within forty-five (45) days after receiving the request, unless the taxpayer waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the Board and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public accountant or other representative. 
(F)  The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator's decision or any part of that decision. The Board shall issue a decision on the appeal within ninety (90) days after the Board's final hearing on the appeal, and send notice of its final decision by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within fifteen (15) days after issuing the decision. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the Board's decision as provided in ORC 5717.011. 
(G)  Each Board of Income Tax Appeal created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such records are not public records available for inspection under ORC 149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Income Tax Appeal created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to ORC 121.22. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.15. - Rental property. 
(A)  Each person owning real property within the City which is rented to others shall within twenty days after January 1 and twenty days after July 1 of each year submit to the Finance Director a list of the names and addresses of the renters as of the January 1 and July 1 dates. 
(B)  Each person owning real property which is rented to others shall include in the list submitted of January 1 and July 1 the names of any persons renting such property between the January 1 and July 1 dates. 
(C)  Each person owning real property which is rented to others, within the City, containing four or more units, shall provide such lists of names and addresses twenty days after January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.16. - Contract provisions. 
No contract on behalf of the City for works or improvements of the City shall be binding or valid unless such contract contains the following provisions: "...hereby agrees to withhold all City income taxes due or payable for wages, salaries and commissions paid to its employees and further agrees that any of its subcontractors shall be required to agree to withhold any such City income taxes due under this chapter for services performed under this contract." 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
Sec. 141.17. - Saving clause. 
This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any property as to whom or which, it is beyond the power of Council to impose the tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional or illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council of the Municipality that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence or part thereof, not been included therein. 
(Ord. 55-04. Passed 11-18-2004.) 
CHAPTER 142. - MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note- Municipal income tax effective January 1, 2016. 
Charter reference- Collection by Director of Finance, Charter  7.02; limitation on levying, Charter  10.01. 
State Law reference- Payroll deductions, ORC 9.42; municipal income taxes, ORC Ch. 718. 
State Constitution reference- Power to levy, Ohio Const., Art. XII, Sec. 8. 

Sec. 142.011. - Authority to levy tax. 
(A)  The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter 142 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter 142 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code 718 (ORC 718). This Chapter is deemed to incorporate the provisions of ORC 718. 
(B)  The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and shall be measured by Municipal Taxable Income. The Municipality shall tax income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on Municipal Taxable Income, as defined herein. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.012. - Purposes of tax; rate. 
(A)  To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations, street maintenance and construction, new equipment and capital improvements, there shall be and is hereby levied a tax on qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits and other taxable income as hereinafter provided. 
(B)  Subject to the provisions of Chapter 142, an annual income tax shall be, and is hereby, levied at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.50%) per annum. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.013. - Allocation of funds. 
The funds collected under this chapter shall be applied for the following purposes; 
(A)  Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of collecting the taxes levied by this chapter, and enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(B)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of street maintenance, construction and repair. 
(C)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of general Municipal operations. 
(D)  Such part thereof as Council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of new equipment and capital improvements. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.014. - Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to municipal income tax. 
(A)  Significant and wide-ranging amendments to ORC 718 were enacted by Am Sub H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of ORC 718 in order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal income tax. 
(B)  As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 33-15, effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Chapter 142 in accordance with the provisions of ORC 718 to allow the Municipality to continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on behalf of the Municipality. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.02. - Effective date. 
(A)  Ordinance 33-15, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding changes to ORC 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this Chapter 142 apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years. 
(B)  Ordinance 33-15 does not repeal the existing sections of Chapter 142 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends Chapter 142 effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016, the Municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the Municipality under ORC 718 and ordinances and resolutions of the Municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.03. - Definitions. 
(A)  Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code. 
For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral. 
As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Adjusted federal taxable income, for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation under subsection (A)(23)(d) of this section, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(a)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
(b)  Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(c)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(d)  i.  Except as provided in subsection (A)(1)(d)ii. of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
ii.  Subsection (A)(1)(d)(i) of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(e)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(f)  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(g)  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under ORC 4313.02; 
(h)  i.  Except as limited by divisions (A)(1)(h)ii., iii. and iv. of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce Municipal Taxable Income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized. 
ii.  No person shall use the deduction allowed by subsection (A)(1)(h) of this section to offset qualifying wages. 
iii.  a.  For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more than fifty percent of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by subsection (A)(1)(h)i. of this section. 
b.  For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by subsection (A)(1)(h)i. of this section. 
iv.  Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to subsection (A)(1)(h) of this section. 
v.  Nothing in subsection (A)(1)(h)iii.a. of this section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of subsection (A)(1)(h)iii.a. of this section. To the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by operation of subsection (A)(1)(h)iii.a. of this section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in subsection (A)(1)(h)iii.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward. 
(i)  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with subsection (E)(3)(b) of Section 142.063 of this chapter. 
(j)  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with subsection (E)(3)(b) of Section 142.063 of this chapter. 
If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in subsection (A)(47)(b) of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in subsection (A)(23)(d) of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
Nothing in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(2)  (a)  Assessment means any of the following: 
i.  A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation; 
ii.  A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under Section 142.096(B)(2) of this chapter; 
iii.  A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's request for use of an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section 142.062(B)(2) of this chapter; or 
iv.  A Tax Administrator's requirement for a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section 142.062(B)(3) of this chapter. 
v.  For purposes of subsection (A)(2)(a)i., ii., iii. and iv. of this section, an assessment shall commence the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to Section 142.18 of this chapter, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such finding. 
(b)  Assessment does not include notice(s) denying a request for refund issued under Section 142.096(B)(3) of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria prescribed by subsection (2)(a) of this section. 
(3)  Audit means the examination of a person or the inspection of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income tax. 
(4)  Board of Review has same meaning as "Local Board of Tax Review". 
(5)  Calendar quarter means the three-month period ending on the last day of March, June, September, or December. 
(6)  Casino operator and casino facility have the same meanings as in ORC 3772.01. 
(7)  Certified mail, express mail, United States mail, postal service, and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to ORC 5703.056. 
(8)  Compensation means any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal services. 
(9)  Disregarded entity means a single member limited liability company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes. 
(10)  Domicile means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. 
(11)  Exempt income means all of the following: 
(a)  The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of the United States or members of their reserve components, including the national guard of any state; 
(b)  i.  Except as provided in subsection (A)(11)(b)ii. of this section, intangible income; 
ii.  A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th general assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988. 
(c)  Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in subsection (A)(11)(c) of this section, "unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(d)  The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-exempt activities. 
(e)  Compensation paid under ORC 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation does not exceed one thousand dollars for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of one thousand dollars for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation. 
(f)  Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and similar organizations; 
(g)  Alimony and child support received; 
(h)  Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages; 
(i)  Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to the tax levied under ORC 5727.24 or 5727.30. Subsection (A)(11)(i) of this section does not apply for purposes of ORC Ch. 5745. 
(j)  Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income from the operation of a trade or business; 
(k)  Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(l)  Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in subsection (A)(34) of this section; 
(m)  Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile. 
(n)  An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net profits that represents wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(o)  All of the Municipal Taxable Income earned by individuals under eighteen years of age. 
(p)  i.  Except as provided in divisions (A)(11)(p)ii., iii., and iv. of this section, qualifying wages described in subsection (B)(1) or (E) of Section 142.052 of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the Municipality under either of those divisions. 
ii.  The exemption provided in subsection (A)(11)(p)i. of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages. 
iii.  The exemption provided in subsection (A)(11)(p)i. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under subsection (D)(2) of Section 142.052 of this chapter. 
iv.  The exemption provided in subsection (A)(11)(p)i. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply: 
a.  For qualifying wages described in subsection (B)(1) of Section 142.052 of this chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in subsection (E) of Section 142.052 of this chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located; 
b.  The employee receives a refund of the tax described in subsection (A)(11)(p)iv.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not performing services in that municipal corporation. 
(q)  i.  Except as provided in subsection (A)(11)(q)ii. or iii. of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a Non-resident individual for personal services performed in the Municipality on not more than twenty days in a taxable year. 
ii.  The exemption provided in subsection (A)(11)(q)i. of this section does not apply under either of the following circumstances: 
a.  The individual's base of operation is located in the Municipality. 
b.  The individual is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of subsection (A)(11)(q)ii.b. of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer," and "public figure" have the same meanings as in Section 142.052 of this chapter. 
iii.  Compensation to which subsection (A)(11)(q) of this section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled. 
iv.  For purposes of subsection (A)(11)(q) of this section, "base of operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation. 
(r)  Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to section 709.023 of the Ohio Revised Code on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence. 
(s)  Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or laws of the United States. Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under subsection (A)(11) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity's income. 
(12)  Form 2106 means internal revenue service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(13)  Generic form means an electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability, including a request for refund. 
(14)  Income means the following: 
(a)  i.  For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in subsection (A)(23)(d) of this section. 
ii.  For the purposes of subsection (A)(14)(a)i. of this section: 
a.  Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to subsection (A)(14)(a)iv. of this section; 
b.  The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year. 
iii.  Subsection (A)(14)(a)ii. of this section does not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S corporation. 
iv.  Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer. 
(b)  In the case of Non-residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the Non-resident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the Municipality, including any net profit of the Non-resident, but excluding the Non-resident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the Non-resident. 
(c)  For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer; 
(d)  Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in Section 142.081 of this chapter. 
(15)  Intangible income means income of any of the following types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined in ORC Ch. 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. "Intangible income" does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance. 
(16)  Internal Revenue Code means the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended. 
(17)  Limited Liability Company means a Limited Liability Company formed under ORC Ch. 1705 or under the laws of another state. 
(18)  Local Board of Tax Review and Board of Tax Review means the entity created under Section 142.18 of this chapter. 
(19)  Municipal corporation means, in general terms, a status conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under ORC 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74. 
(20)  (a)  Municipal Taxable Income means the following: 
i.  For a person other than an individual, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality under Section 142.062 of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the Municipality. 
ii.  a.  For an individual who is a resident of a Municipality other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in subsection (A)(20)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the Municipality. 
b.  For an individual who is a resident of a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation from the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or before December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no Municipal Taxable Income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of ORC 718.03. 
iii.  For an individual who is a Non-resident of the Municipality, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality under Section 142.062 of this chapter, then reduced as provided in subsection (A)(20)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the Municipality. 
(b)  In computing the Municipal Taxable Income of a taxpayer who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in subsection (A)(20)(a)ii.a. or iii. of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in that Non-resident municipal corporation. 
(21)  Municipality means the City of Marysville and any joint economic development district, to which the City of Marysville is a party that levies an income tax under ORC 718.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74. 
(22)  Net operating loss means a loss incurred by a person in the operation of a trade or business. "Net operating loss" does not include unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss limitations. 
(23)  (a)  Net profit , for the purpose of this division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (A)(1)(h) of this section. 
(b)  Net profit for a person who is an individual means the individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of subsection (A)(23)(a) of this section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (A)(1)(h) of this section. 
(c)  For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding subsection (A)(23)(a) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity. 
(d)  i.  For purposes of this chapter, publicly traded partnership means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A publicly traded partnership may have any number of partners. 
ii.  For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded partnership that makes the election described in subsection (A)(23)(d) of this section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership. 
iii.  A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under subsection (A)(23)(d)iv. of this section. 
iv.  An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period in effect under subsection (A)(23)(d)iii. of this section. The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period. 
v.  The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but subsection (A)(23)(d) of this section applies to all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership resides. 
vi.  The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit. 
(24)  Non-resident means an individual that is not a resident of the Municipality. 
(25)  Ohio Business Gateway means the online computer network system, created under ORC 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment system. 
(26)  Other payer means any person, other than an individual's employer or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino operators and video lottery terminal sales agents. 
(27)  Pass-through entity means a partnership not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity" does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity. 
(28)  Pension means any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form. 
(29)  Person includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity. 
(30)  Postal service means the United States postal service, or private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item. 
(31)  Postmark date, date of postmark, and similar terms include the date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or document was given to the delivery service for delivery. 
(32)  (a)  Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the Municipality that was adopted by the Municipality before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated in such Municipality in future taxable years. 
(b)  For the purpose of calculating Municipal Taxable Income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully utilized, whichever is earlier. 
(33)  Qualified municipal corporation means a municipal corporation that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by ORC 5747.01, as the income subject to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax. 
(34)  Qualifying wages means wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows: 
(a)  Deduct the following amounts: 
i.  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
ii.  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer. 
iii.  Any amount included in wages that is exempt income. 
(b)  Add the following amounts: 
i.  Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986. 
ii.  Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased under a stock option. Subsection (A)(34)(b)ii. of this section applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income. 
iii.  Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Subsection (A)(34)(b)iii. of this section applies only to employee contributions and employee deferrals. 
iv.  Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not included in wages. 
v.  Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
vi.  Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply: 
a.  For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
b.  For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
c.  For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute wages; and 
d.  For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either subsection (34)(b) of this section or ORC 718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23, 2015. 
(35)  Related entity means any of the following: 
(a)  An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
(b)  A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
(c)  A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation under subsection (A)(35)(d) of this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, at least fifty percent of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock; 
(d)  The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in subsections (A)(35)(a)-(c) of this section have been met. 
(36)  Related member means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty percent" shall be substituted for "5 percent" wherever "5 percent" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(37)  Resident means an individual who is domiciled in the Municipality as determined under Section 142.042 of this chapter. 
(38)  S corporation means a person that has made an election under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year. 
(39)  Schedule C means internal revenue service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(40)  Schedule E means internal revenue service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(41)  Schedule F means internal revenue service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(42)  Single Member Limited Liability Company means a Limited Liability Company that has one direct member. 
(43)  Small employer means any employer that had total revenue of less than five hundred thousand dollars during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division, total revenue means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting principles. Small employer does not include the federal government; any state government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes. 
(44)  Tax Administrator means the individual charged with direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the following: 
(a)  A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another municipal corporation; 
(b)  A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; 
(c)  The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency. 
(45)  Tax return preparer means any individual described in section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15. 
(46)  Taxable year means the corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(47)  (a)  Taxpayer means a person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. "Taxpayer" does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in subsection (A)(47)(b)i. of this section, a disregarded entity. 
(b)  i.  A single member limited liability company that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The limited liability company's single member is also a limited liability company. 
b.  The limited liability company and its single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004. 
c.  Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate taxpayer under subsection (L) of ORC 718.01 as this section existed on December 31, 2004. 
d.  The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member. 
e.  The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the election. 
ii.  For purposes of subsection (A)(47)(b)i.e. of this section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred thousand dollars. 
(48)  Taxpayers' rights and responsibilities means the rights provided to taxpayers in ORC 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011, and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the Municipality, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with ORC Ch. 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax. 
(49)  Video lottery terminal has the same meaning as in ORC 3770.21. 
(50)  Video lottery terminal sales agent means a lottery sales agent licensed under ORC Ch. 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state pursuant to ORC 3770.21. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.041. - Determining Municipal Taxable Income for individuals. 
(A)  Municipal Taxable Income for a resident of the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(1)  Income by Exempt Income to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in subsection (A)(20)(b) of Section 142.03 of this chapter, further reduced by any Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward equals Municipal Taxable Income . 
(a)  Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(14) of this chapter. 
i.  Qualifying Wages is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(34). 
ii.  Net profit is included in income , and is defined in subsection 142.03 (A)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (A)(1)(h) of Section 142.03. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in Section 142.062(E). 
iii.  Subsection 142.03(A)(14) provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in subsection 142.03(A)(14)(a)ii.a.; resident's distributive share of net profit from pass through entity treatment in subsection 142.03(A)(14)(a)ii.b.; treatment of S Corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder in subsection 142.03(A)(14)(a)iii.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in subsection 142.03(A)(14)(a)iv. 
iv.  Pass Through Entity is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(27). 
(b)  Exempt Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(11) of this chapter. 
(c)  Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in subsection (A)(20)(B) of Section 142.03 of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in that section. 
(d)  Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(32) of this chapter. 
(B)  Municipal Taxable Income for a Non-resident of the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(1)  Income reduced by Exempt Income to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality as provided in Section 142.062 of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in subsection (A)(20)(b) of Section 142.03 of this chapter, further reduced by any Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward equals Municipal Taxable Income . 
(a)  Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(14) of this chapter. 
i.  Qualifying Wages is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(34). 
ii.  Net profit is included in income , and is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (A)(1)(h) of Section 142.03. Net profit for a Non-resident individual includes any net profit of the Non-resident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the Non-resident. 
iii.  Pass Through Entity is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(27). 
(b)  Exempt Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(11) of this chapter. 
(c)  Apportioned or sitused to the Municipality as provided in Section 142.062 of this chapter includes the apportionment of net profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the Municipality. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in subsection 142.062(E). 
(d)  Allowable employee business expense deduction as described in subsection (A)(20)(b) of Section 142.03 of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that section. For a Non-resident of the Municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the Non-resident in the Municipality. 
(e)  Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(32) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.042. - Domicile. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Domicile means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. 
(2)  An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the Municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of the taxable year. 
(3)  An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in subsection (A)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of the taxable year. 
(B)  For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The individual's domicile in other taxable years; 
(2)  The location at which the individual is registered to vote; 
(3)  The address on the individual's driver's license; 
(4)  The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's residence or domicile; 
(5)  The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual; 
(6)  Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the individual's residency; 
(7)  The primary location at which the individual is employed; 
(8)  The location of educational institutions attended by the individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located; 
(9)  The number of contact periods the individual has with the Municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact period" with the Municipality if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode located outside of the Municipality and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the Municipality. For purposes of this section, the state's contact period test or bright-line test and resulting determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile. 
(C)  All applicable factors are provided in ORC 718.012. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.043. - Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and certain judges. 
(A)  Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from appropriated funds of this state. 
(B)  Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.051. - Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages. 
(A)  (1)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing business in the Municipality shall withhold from each employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the Municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the Municipality's income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under Section 142.052 of this chapter or subsections (D) or (F) of this section. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee. 
(2)  In addition to withholding the amounts required under subsection (A)(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident. 
(B)  (1)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the Municipality the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following schedule: 
(a)  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) of this section of taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
(b)  Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand three hundred ninety-nine dollars, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the Municipality in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred dollars. Payment under subsection (B)(1)(b) of this section shall be made so that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than fifteen days after the last day of each month. 
(c)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this division shall be accepted by the Municipality as the return required of an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, unless the Municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers to file a tax return under Section 142.091 of this chapter, 
(d)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's successor entity. 
(e)  i.  An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax. 
ii.  The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to remit to the Municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld. 
(f)  Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed. 
(g)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall be deemed to be held in trust for the Municipality until such time as the withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator. 
(h)  On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall file a Withholding Reconciliation Return with the Tax Administrator listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the Municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee's qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator. 
(i)  The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due. 
(j)  An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means. 
(k)  A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 13-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 142.052. - Collection at source; occasional entrant. 
(A)  The following terms as used in this section: 
(1)  Employer includes a person that is a related member to or of an employer. 
(2)  Professional athlete means an athlete who performs services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration. 
(3)  Professional entertainer means a person who performs services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(4)  Public figure means a person of prominence who performs services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(5)  Fixed location means a permanent place of doing business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or controlled by an employer. 
(6)  Worksite location means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than twenty days during the calendar year. "Worksite location" does not include the home of an employee. 
(7)  Principal place of work means the fixed location to which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place of work" means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of work" means the location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer. 
If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages subject to subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section among those two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the location at which an employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with subsection (B)(2) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that division. 
(B)  (1)  Subject to subsections (C), (E), (F), and (G) of this section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in the municipal corporation on twenty or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies: 
(a)  The employee's principal place of work is located in the Municipality. 
(b)  The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite locations in the Municipality. For the purposes of this division, "presumed worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty days in a calendar year. Services can "reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty days" if either of the following applies at the time the services commence: 
i.  The nature of the services are such that it will require more than twenty days of actual services to complete the services; 
ii.  The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the location for more than twenty days. 
(c)  The employee is a resident of the Municipality and has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in Section 142.051 of this chapter. 
(d)  The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the Municipality. 
(2)  For the purposes of subsection (B)(1) of this section, an employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of work: 
(a)  Traveling to the location at which the employee will first perform services for the employer for the day; 
(b)  Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing services for the employer to any other location; 
(c)  Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer; 
(d)  Transporting or delivering property described in subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer; 
(e)  Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform services for the employer. 
(C)  If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is located. 
(D)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the twenty-day threshold described in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation. 
(2)  An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal corporation under subsection (D)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first twenty days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation. 
(3)  If an employer makes the election described in subsection (D)(2) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those first twenty days to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee. 
(E)  Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in Section 142.03 of this chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year. 
(F)  Subsections (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of Section 142.051 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.053. - Collection at source; casino and VLT. 
(A)  The Municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino operator, as defined in Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and ORC 3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminals sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this section. 
(B)  If a person's winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue service of the amount is required by section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's winnings at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located. 
(C)  Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed. 
(1)  On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the Municipality, providing the name, address, and social security number of the person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit electronically to the Municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month. 
(2)  Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located, indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return. 
(3)  Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino operator shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted from the person's winnings during the preceding year. The casino operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this division. The administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically. 
(4)  A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld. 
(5)  If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following: 
(a)  A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; 
(b)  A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 
(6)  The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the required amount from a person's winnings does not relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings. 
(D)  If a person's prize award from a video lottery terminal is an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue service is required by section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's prize award at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery terminal facility is located. 
(E)  Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed. 
(1)  The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award the person's name, address, and social security number in order to facilitate the preparation of returns required by this section. 
(2)  On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the Municipality providing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month. 
(3)  A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts issued under subsection (E) of this section and shall make those records available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be maintained in accordance with ORC 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(4)  Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, each video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return. 
(5)  Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a video lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted and withheld from the person's prize award by the video lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically. 
(6)  A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld. 
(F)  If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the following: 
(1)  A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; 
(2)  A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 
(G)  The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the required amount from a person's prize award does not relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award. 
(H)  If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable penalty: 
(1)  For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to fifty percent of the tax deducted and withheld; 
(2)  For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual return, a penalty of five hundred dollars for each return not filed or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate prescribed in ORC 5703.47. 
(I)  Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of Section 142.07 of this chapter. This division applies only to the person for whom the amount is deducted and withheld. 
(J)  The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and returns required under this section. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.061. - Determining Municipal Taxable Income for taxpayers who are not individuals. 
Municipal Taxable Income for a taxpayer who is not an individual for the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(A)  Income reduced by Exempt Income to the extent otherwise included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward equals Municipal Taxable Income . 
(1)  Income for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the Net Profit of the taxpayer. 
(a)  Net Profit for a person other than an individual is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(23). 
(b)  Adjusted Federal Taxable Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(1) of this chapter. 
(2)  Exempt Income is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(11) of this chapter. 
(3)  Apportionment means the apportionment as determined by Section 142.062 of this chapter. 
(4)  Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward is defined in subsection 142.03(A)(32) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.062. - Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative apportionment. 
This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in the Municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under ORC Ch. 5745. 
(A)  Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the Municipality shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the Municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the Municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(2)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the Municipality to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under Section 142.052 of this chapter; 
(3)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the Municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(B)  (1)  If the apportionment factors described in subsection (A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in the Municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the Municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 
(a)  Separate accounting; 
(b)  The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 
(c)  The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the Municipality; 
(d)  A modification of one or more of the factors. 
(2)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by subsection (A) of Section 142.19 of this chapter. 
(3)  A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in subsection (B)(1) of this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by subsection (A) of Section 142.19 of this chapter. 
(4)  Nothing in subsection (B) of this section nullifies or otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and taxpayer before January 1, 2016. 
(C)  As used in subsection (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(1)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one of the following: 
(a)  The employer; 
(b)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
(c)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(2)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer; 
(3)  Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable. 
(D)  For the purposes of subsection (A)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows: 
(1)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following criteria: 
(a)  The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation. 
(b)  The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales results from such solicitation or promotion. 
(2)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the municipal corporation. 
(3)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(4)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(5)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation. 
(E)  The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit resides. A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located. 
(F)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (F)(2) of this section, commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(2)  An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax return for that municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the extent that such credit is allowed under Section 142.081 of this chapter. 
(G)  If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation under divisions (A)(11)(l) and (A)(34)(a)iv. of Section 142.03 of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal corporation under this section. 
(H)  When calculating the ratios described in subsection (A) of this section for the purposes of that division or subsection (B) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.063. - Consolidated federal income tax return. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Affiliated group of corporations means an affiliated group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  Consolidated federal income tax return means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Consolidated federal taxable income means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Incumbent local exchange carrier has the same meaning as in ORC 4927.01. 
(5)  Local exchange telephone service has the same meaning as in ORC 5727.01. 
(B)  (1)  For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. 
(a)  The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. 
(b)  The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under subsection (B)(2) of this section; or 
(c)  A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in effect under subsection (B)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(C)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(D)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(E)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in subsection 142.03(A)(1) of this chapter, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under subsection (A)(1) of 142.03 of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
(a)  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 142.062 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(b)  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 142.062 of this chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
(a)  The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in Section 142.062 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 
(b)  The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(F)  Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall make the computations required under Section 142.062 of this chapter by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(G)  Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(H)  Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.064. - Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio. 
The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the Municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the Municipality derives from new employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding fifteen years. Before the Municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.065. - Tax credits to foster job retention. 
The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in the Municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the Municipality derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding fifteen years. Before the Municipality passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.07. - Declaration of estimated tax. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Estimated taxes means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal corporation's income tax for the current taxable year. 
(2)  Tax liability means the total taxes due to a municipal corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year. 
(B)  (1)  Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars. For the purposes of this section: 
(a)  Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld. 
(b)  An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, "date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service. 
(c)  A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(d)  Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent under section 718.031 of the Ohio Revised Code are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the taxpayer's winnings. 
(2)  Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of estimated taxes. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under subsection 142.091(G) of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal year or period. 
(5)  The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as provided in this section. 
(C)  (1)  The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows: 
(a)  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(b)  On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(c)  On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(d)  For an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the first month of the following taxable year, ninety percent of the tax liability for the taxable year. For a person other than an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, ninety percent of the tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (C)(1)(a)-(d) of this section. 
(3)  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the return in accordance with Section 142.091 of this chapter. 
(a)  For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended pursuant to ORC 5747.08(G). 
(b)  For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxable year or period. 
(4)  An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer's estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for the taxable year. 
(D)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to Section 142.10 of this chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in subsection (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(b)  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(c)  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(d)  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty. 
(E)  An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under subsection (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety percent of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one hundred percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal corporation under Section 142.091 of this chapter for that year. 
(3)  The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Municipality but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes the first day of the taxable year. 
(F)  A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.081. - Credit for tax paid to another Municipality. 
Editor's note- This section was intentionally left blank. 
Sec. 142.082. - Refundable credit for qualifying loss. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Nonqualified deferred compensation plan means a compensation plan described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  (a)  Except as provided in subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section, qualifying loss means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer's receipt of money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(b)  If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the product of the amount resulting from the calculation described in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section computed without regard to subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section and a fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(c)  With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(3)  Qualifying tax rate means the applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate. 
(2)  A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable years. 
(3)  If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(4)  In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(C)  (1)  For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(2)  Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the municipal corporation by the taxpayer. 
(D)  The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to: 
(1)  The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or 
(2)  The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred compensation. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.083. - Credit for person working in joint economic development district or zone. 
A Municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident of the Municipality who works in a joint economic development zone created under ORC 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under ORC 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation, pursuant to Section 142.081 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.084. - Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund. 
(A)  Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the Municipality, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is allowable by the Municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds as provided in Section 142.096 of this chapter. 
(B)  Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the Municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall be subject to collection and recovery by the Municipality. To the extent a refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as provided in Section 142.096, the Municipality will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the Municipality claims is due. If the Municipality's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection by the Municipality, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment. 
(C)  No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in Section 142.096 of this chapter. 
(D)  Nothing in this section requires a Municipality to allow credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the Municipality has reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section 142.081 of this chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.091. - Return and payment of tax. 
(A)  (1)  An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on Municipal Taxable Income by the Municipality shall be completed and filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all Non-resident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located in the Municipality under subsection 142.051(C) of this chapter when the Non-resident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the Municipality. 
(3)  All resident individual taxpayers, eighteen (18) years of age and older, shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the Municipality, regardless of income or liability. 
(B)  If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor, administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent. 
(C)  If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, the return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person. 
(D)  Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone number of the fiduciary. 
(E)  No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a joint return. 
(F)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed. 
(3)  A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. 
(4)  A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio business gateway or a portal provided by Municipality. The department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division through the Ohio business gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The department shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this division to the appropriate Tax Administrator. 
(5)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required by the Municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under subsection (F) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(6)  Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses. 
(G)  (1)  Tax Return Filing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under ORC 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator. 
(c)  In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount shown to be due is ten dollars or less. 
(2)  If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(3)  With respect to taxpayers to whom Section 142.092 of this chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts with any provision in Section 142.092 of this chapter, the provision in Section 142.092 of this chapter prevails. 
(H)  (1)  For taxable years beginning after 2015, the Municipality shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount due is ten dollars or less. 
(2)  Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the Municipality for a taxable year pursuant to subsection (H)(1) of this section shall file with the Municipality an annual net profit return under subsection (F)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(I)  This division shall not apply to payments required to be made under subsection (B)(1)(b) of Section 142.051 of this chapter. 
(1)  If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment. "The date of postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service. 
(2)  If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For purposes of this section, "submitted the payment" means the date which the taxpayer has designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be the same date as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer. 
(J)  The amounts withheld for the Municipality by an employer, the agent of an employer, or other payer as described in Section 142.051 of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld were not remitted to the Municipality and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld. 
(K)  Each return required by the Municipality to be filed in accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters. 
(L)  The Tax Administrator of the Municipality shall accept for filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the Municipality or Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of the Municipality's Ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents. 
(M)  When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature. 
(N)  (1)  As used in this division, worksite location has the same meaning as in Section 142.052 of this chapter. 
(2)  A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply: 
(a)  The person was required to file a tax return with the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The person no longer provides services in the municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation's income tax for the taxable year. 
The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed services or made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall include the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal corporation's resolutions, ordinances, or rules." The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury. 
(c)  If a person submits an affidavit described in subsection (N)(2) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that results in Municipal Taxable Income reportable to the Municipality in the taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of Municipal Taxable Income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in subsection (N) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.092. - Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone. 
(A)  Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the Municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter during the period of the member's or civilian's duty service and for one hundred eighty days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension. 
(B)  (1)  If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate. 
(2)  If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax otherwise due to the Municipality before the one hundred eighty-first day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. 
(3)  Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under subsection (B)(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. 
(C)  (1)  Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this section. 
(2)  (a)  A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section, "qualifying taxpayer" means a member of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces. 
(b)  Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax. 
(D)  For each taxable year to which subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (3) or (C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.093. - Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized. 
(A)  Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(B)  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(C)  Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax. 
(D)  The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law. 
(E)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.094. - Extension of time to file. 
(A)  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. 
(B)  Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for a period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return. 
(C)  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension. 
(D)  An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that date. 
(E)  If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for filing state income tax returns under ORC 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.095. - Amended returns. 
(A)  (1)  A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return to determine the tax due levied by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter must be altered. 
(2)  Within sixty days after the final determination of any federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is ten dollars or less. 
(3)  If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the amended return. 
(B)  (1)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten dollars or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided under subsection (B)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under Section 142.19 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return. 
(2)  The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened. 
(C)  (1)  In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by subsection (A)(2) of Section 142.19 of this chapter for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars or less, no refund need be paid by the Municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in Section 142.096 of this chapter. Except as set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return. 
(2)  The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.096. - Refunds. 
(A)  Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the Municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied by the Municipality: 
(1)  Overpayments of more than ten dollars; 
(2)  Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten dollars. 
(B)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any documentation that substantiates the taxpayer's claim for a refund must be included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of undocumented credits or losses. 
(2)  On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment. 
(3)  If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under Section 142.18 of this chapter. 
(C)  A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing specified in subsection (B) of this section shall be considered to have been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist: 
(1)  The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request. 
(2)  The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day. 
(3)  The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven days of the last day for making the request. 
(D)  Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is refunded within ninety days after the final filing date of the annual return or ninety days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in subsection (A)(4) of Section 142.10 of this chapter. 
(E)  As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same meaning as in Section 142.10 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.10. - Penalty, interest, fees, and charges. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Applicable law means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the Municipality provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing requirements of a municipal income tax. 
(2)  Federal short-term rate means the rate of the average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year. 
(3)  Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(4)  Interest rate as described in subsection (A) of this section means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus five percent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
(5)  Return includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(6)  Unpaid estimated income tax means estimated income tax due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(7)  Unpaid income tax means income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(8)  Unpaid withholding tax means withholding tax due but not paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(9)  Withholding tax includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying wages. 
(B)  (1)  This section shall apply to the following: 
(a)  Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; 
(b)  Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to be paid or remitted to the Municipality on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016. 
(2)  This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of this Municipality. 
(C)  The Municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make to the Municipality timely and full payment or remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the Municipality any return required to be filed. 
(1)  Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as "interest rate as described in subsection (A) of this section", per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month. 
(2)  With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax, a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed. 
(3)  With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a municipal corporation may impose a penalty not exceeding fifty percent of the amount not timely paid. 
(4)  With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the Municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of twenty-five dollars for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed a total of one hundred fifty dollars in assessed penalty for each failure to timely file a return. 
(D)  With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality shall not impose, seek to collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not described in this section. 
(E)  With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016. 
(F)  The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such abatement or partial abatement. 
(G)  The Municipality may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer the Municipality's post-judgment collection costs and fees, including attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.11. - Audit. 
(A)  At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in Section 142.03(3) of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced. 
(B)  Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable alternative dates for the audit. 
(C)  At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. 
A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(D)  A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit examination. 
(E)  The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case. 
(F)  If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from the audit. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.12. - Rounding. 
A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds fifty cents shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents shall be dropped, rounding down to the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.131. - Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax Administrator. 
The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter, including without limitation: 
(A)  Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter; 
(B)  Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties; 
(C)  Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their respective official duties as provided by law; 
(D)  Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter; 
(E)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax claims; 
(F)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with Section 142.062 of this chapter; 
(G)  Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final; 
(H)  Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner authorized by law; 
(I)  Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding obligations described in Section 142.051 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.132. - Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over time. 
(A)  As used in this section, claim means a claim for an amount payable to the Municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in accordance with this chapter. 
(B)  The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the Municipality: 
(1)  Compromise a claim; 
(2)  Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require. 
(C)  The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable. 
(D)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the liability of any other person. 
(E)  (1)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement. 
(F)  The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer's failure to provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.133. - Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine. 
(A)  The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(B)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the Municipality or for the withholding of such tax. 
(C)  The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(D)  No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.134. - Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information. 
(A)  The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information. 
(B)  (1)  If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom the request was directed pursuant to Section 142.10 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in Section 142.99 of this chapter. 
(2)  If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with respect to that information as required under subsection (A) of this section within thirty days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to Section 142.10 of this chapter. 
(3)  The penalties provided for under subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in Section 142.99 of this chapter for a violation of Section 142.15 of this chapter, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by law. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.14. - Confidentiality. 
(A)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by ORC 718 or by the charter or ordinance of the Municipality is confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the official business of the Municipality as authorized by ORC 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the Municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations. 
(B)  This section does not prohibit the Municipality from publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.15. - Fraud. 
No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the Municipality or the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.16. - Opinion of the Tax Administrator. 
(A)  An opinion of the Tax Administrator means an opinion issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator. 
(B)  A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax Administrator shall be an "opinion of the Tax Administrator" and shall bind the Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and (H) of this section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The taxpayer's request fully and accurately describes the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts. 
(2)  The request relates to a tax imposed by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax Administrator and designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator." 
(C)  An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates: 
(1)  The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later; 
(2)  The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the Municipality's income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator; 
(3)  The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the Municipality's income tax ordinance; 
(4)  If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or regulations; 
(5)  The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material facts or circumstances; 
(6)  The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified in the opinion. 
(D)  (1)  A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts. 
(2)  If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the Municipality in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of Section 142.15 of this chapter. 
(E)  If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the opinion shall include a statement that: 
(1)  The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change for any of the reasons stated in subsection (C) of this section; 
(2)  It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes. 
(F)  A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request received under this section. 
(G)  This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016. 
(H)  An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation. 
(I)  A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties involved in the activity or transaction. 
(J)  An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a refusal to offer an opinion under subsection (F) may not be appealed. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.17. - Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery. 
(A)  (1)  The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under ORC 5703.056. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be authorized by the person subject to the assessment. 
(3)  Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within sixty days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator as prescribed in ORC 718.18 is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the assessment is served. 
(B)  (1)  A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty percent, as determined by voting rights, of the addressee's business. 
(2)  If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described in subsection (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within sixty days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.18. - Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review. 
(A)  (1)  The legislative authority of the Municipality shall maintain a Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in ORC Ch. 718. 
(2)  The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the Municipality, and may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the Municipality at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality. This member may be an employee of the Municipality, but may not be the director of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof. 
(3)  The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative authority of the Municipality shall be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality shall serve at the discretion of the administrative official. 
(4)  Members of the board of tax review appointed by the legislative authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in ORC 718.11(A)(4). 
(5)  A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign immediately by operation of law. 
(6)  A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment within sixty days of when the vacancy was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board. 
(7)  If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member's place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve. 
(B)  Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed. 
(C)  Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within sixty days after the taxpayer receives the assessment. 
(D)  The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within sixty days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under subsection (C) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must be completed within one hundred twenty days after the first day of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise. 
(E)  The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall issue a final determination on the appeal within ninety days after the board's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within fifteen days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the board's final determination as provided in ORC 5717.011. 
(F)  The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs, and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records available for inspection under ORC 149.43. For this reason, any documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to ORC 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present during the hearing. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.19. - Actions to recover; statute of limitations. 
(A)  (1)  Actions to Recover. 
(a)  Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the latter of: 
i.  Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later; or 
ii.  One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral period, if any. 
(b)  The time limit described in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit described in subsection (C) of this section. 
(2)  As used in this section, qualifying deferral period means a period of time beginning and ending as follows: 
(a)  Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in Section 142.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that assessment. 
(b)  Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken. 
(B)  Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-five percent or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the offense. 
(C)  A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within the time limitation provided in Section 142.096 of this chapter. 
(D)  (1)  Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the Municipality does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal. 
(2)  If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created under Section 142.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio board of tax appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio board of tax appeals has been appealed, so that the amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant's assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by Section 142.096 of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by subsection (D) of this section. 
(E)  No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; 
(2)  The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.20. - Adoption of rules. 
(A)  Pursuant to ORC 718.30, to adopt rules and/or policies to administer the income tax imposed by the Municipality. 
(B)  All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the internet. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.21. - Rental property. 
(A)  Each person owning real properties within the City which are rented to others shall by January 21 and July 21 of each year submit to the Finance Director a list of the names and addresses of the renters as of January 1 and July 1 of that same year. 
(Ord. 6-17 . Passed 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 142.22. - Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of chapter. 
(A)  A taxpayer may elect to be subject to sections ORC 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply: 
(1)  The tax commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator of each municipal income tax for which the taxpayer is liable for the term of the election; 
(2)  The commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to ORC 718.80-718.95 and any applicable provision of ORC Ch. 5703. 
(B)  (1)  A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year by notifying the tax commissioner and each municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducted business during the previous taxable year, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(2)  (a)  The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the tax commissioner and each municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducted business during the previous taxable year of its termination of the election. 
(b)  A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any taxable year. 
(c)  Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to ORC 718.80-718.95, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(C)  (1)  Rate of Tax Certification. 
(a)  On or before the thirty-first day of January each year, each municipal corporation imposing a tax on income shall certify to the tax commissioner the rate of the tax in effect on the first day of January of that year. 
(b)  If, after the thirty-first day of January of any year, the electors of a municipal corporation approve an increase in the rate of the municipal corporation's tax on income that takes effect within that year, the municipal corporation shall certify to the tax commissioner the new rate of tax not less than sixty days before the effective date of the increase, after which effective date the commissioner shall apply the increased rate. 
(2)  A municipal corporation, within ninety days of receiving a taxpayer's notification of election under subsection (B) of this section, shall submit to the tax commissioner, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner, the following information regarding the taxpayer: 
(a)  The amount of any net operating loss that the taxpayer is entitled to carry forward to a future tax year; 
(b)  The amount of any net operating loss carry forward utilized by the taxpayer in prior years; 
(c)  Any credits granted by the municipal corporation to which the taxpayer is entitled, the amount of such credits, whether the credits may be carried forward to future tax years, and, if the credits may be carried forward, the duration of any such carryforward; 
(d)  Any overpayments of tax that the taxpayer has elected to carry forward to a subsequent tax year; 
(e)  Any other information the municipal corporation deems relevant in order to effectuate the tax commissioner's efficient administration of the tax on the municipal corporation's behalf. 
(3)  If any municipal corporation fails to timely comply with divisions (C)(1) and (2) of this section, the tax commissioner shall notify the director of budget and management, who, upon receiving such notification, shall withhold from each payment made to the municipal corporation under ORC 718.83 fifty percent of the amount of the payment otherwise due to the municipal corporation under that section. The director shall compute the withholding on the basis of the tax rate most recently certified to the tax commissioner until the municipal corporation complies with divisions (C)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(D)  The tax commissioner shall enforce and administer ORC 718.80-718.95. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the tax commissioner by law, the tax commissioner may: 
(1)  Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections; 
(2)  Adopt such rules as the tax commissioner finds necessary to carry out those sections; 
(3)  Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the duties imposed upon the tax commissioner by those sections. 
(E)  No tax administrator shall utilize ORC 718.81-718.95 in the administrator's administration of a municipal income tax, and those sections shall not be applied to any taxpayer that has not made the election under this section. 
(F)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make any section of this chapter, other than ORC 718.01 and 718.80-718.95, applicable to the tax commissioner's administration of a municipal income tax or to any taxpayer that has made the election under this section. 
(G)  The tax commissioner shall not be considered a tax administrator, as that term is defined in ORC 718.01. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.23. - Definitions. 
If a term used in ORC 718.80-718.95 that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in ORC Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the use of the term in CRC Title LVII, unless the term is defined in ORC Ch. 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this section and ORC 718.01, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of that term in ORC 718.80-718.95. As used in ORC 718.80-718.95 only: 
(A)  Municipal taxable income means income apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under ORC 718.82, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the municipal corporation. 
(B)  Adjusted federal taxable income, for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation as described in division (D)(5) of ORC 718.01, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(1)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
(2)  Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted under subsection (B)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  (a)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(4)(b) of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Subsection (B)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(6)  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(7)  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under ORC 4313.02. 
(8)  Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income. 
(9)  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of ORC 718.86. 
(10)  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of ORC 718.86. If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (L)(2) of section ORC 718.01, and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division (D)(5) of ORC 718.01, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. Nothing in subsection (B) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(C)  Taxpayer has the same meaning as in ORC 718.01, except that "taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under ORC Ch. 5745. "Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer. 
(D)  Tax return or return means the notifications and reports required to be filed pursuant to ORC 718.80-718.95 for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax. 
(E)  Taxable year means the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of ORC 718.80-718.95 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The tax commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year. 
(F)  Assessment means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued pursuant to ORC 718.90. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.24. - Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment. 
This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in a municipal corporation and that has made the election under ORC 718.80. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the municipal corporation for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the municipal corporation during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(2)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the municipal corporation to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under ORC 718.011; 
(3)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the municipal corporation to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(B)  (1)  If the apportionment factors described in subsection (A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in a municipal corporation, the taxpayer may request, or the tax commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 
(a)  Separate accounting; 
(b)  The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 
(c)  The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the municipal corporation; 
(d)  A modification of one or more of the factors. 
(2)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the tax commissioner denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (A) of ORC 718.90. 
(3)  The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in subsection (B)(1) of this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by division (A) of ORC 718.90. 
(C)  As used in subsection (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(1)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one of the following: 
(a)  The employer; 
(b)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
(c)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(2)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer; 
(3)  Any other location, if the tax commissioner determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If the tax commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tax commissioner's determination was unreasonable. 
(D)  For the purposes of subsection (A)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows: 
(1)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following criteria: 
(a)  The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation. 
(b)  The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(2)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the municipal corporation. 
(3)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(4)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(5)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation. 
(E)  Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(F)  If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation under divisions (C)(12) and (R)(1)(d) of ORC 718.01 by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal corporation under this section. 
(G)  When calculating the ratios described in subsection (A) of this section for the purposes of that division or subsection (B) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.25. - Certification of amounts to be paid municipal corporations. 
(A)  On or before the last day of each month, the tax commissioner shall certify to the director of budget and management the amount to be paid to each municipal corporation, based on amounts reported on annual returns and declarations of estimated tax under ORC 718.85 and 718.88, less any amounts previously distributed and net of any audit adjustments made or refunds granted by the commissioner, for the calendar month preceding the month in which the certification is made. Not later than the fifth day of each month, the director shall provide for payment of the amount certified to each municipal corporation from the municipal income tax fund, plus a pro rata share of any investment earnings accruing to the fund since the previous payment under this section. Each municipal corporation's share of such earnings shall equal the proportion that the municipal corporation's certified tax payment is of the total taxes certified to all municipal corporations in that quarter. All investment earnings on money in the municipal income tax fund shall be credited to that fund. 
(B)  If the tax commissioner determines that the amount of tax paid by a taxpayer and distributed to a municipal corporation under this section for a taxable year exceeds the amount payable to that municipal corporation under ORC 718.80-718.95 after accounting for amounts remitted with the annual return and as estimated taxes, the commissioner shall proceed according to divisions (A) and (B) of ORC 5703.77. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.25.5. - Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality. 
(A)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by ORC 80-718.95 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as provided in ORC 4123.271 or 5703.21. The tax commissioner may furnish the internal revenue service with copies of returns filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
(B)  In May and November of each year, the tax commissioner shall provide each tax administrator with the following information for every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the commissioner under ORC 718.80-718.95 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the municipal corporation under this chapter for any prior year: 
(1)  The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer identification number; 
(2)  The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal taxable income apportionable to, the municipal corporation pursuant to ORC 718.82; 
(3)  The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized by the taxpayer; 
(4)  Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried forward to a future taxable year; 
(5)  The amount of any credit claimed under ORC 718.94. 
(C)  Not later than thirty days after each distribution made to municipal corporations under ORC 718.83, the tax commissioner shall provide to each municipal corporation a report stating the name and federal identification number of every taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the municipal corporation and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment. 
(D)  Not later than the thirty-first day of January of each year, every municipal corporation having taxpayers that have made the election allowed under ORC 718.80 shall provide to the tax commissioner, in a format prescribed by the commissioner, the name and mailing address of up to two persons to whom the municipal corporation requests that the commissioner send the information described in subsections (B) and (C) of this section. The commissioner shall not provide such information to any person other than a person who is designated to receive the information under this section and who is employed by the municipal corporation or by a tax administrator, as defined in ORC 718.01, that administers the municipal corporation's income tax, except as may otherwise be provided by law. 
(E)  (1)  The tax commissioner may adopt rules that further govern the terms and conditions under which tax returns filed with the commissioner under this chapter, and any other information gained in the performance of the commissioner's duties prescribed by this chapter, shall be available for inspection by properly authorized officers, employees, or agents of the municipal corporations to which the taxpayer's net profit is apportioned under ORC 718.82. 
(2)  As used in this division, properly authorized officer, employee, or agent means an officer, employee, or agent of a municipal corporation who is authorized by charter or ordinance of the municipal corporation to view or possess information referred to in ORC 718.13. 
(F)  (1)  If, upon receiving the information described in division (B) of ORC 718.91 or subsection (B) or (C) of this section, a municipal corporation discovers that it has additional information in its possession that could result in a change to a taxpayer's tax liability, the municipal corporation may refer the taxpayer to the tax commissioner for an audit. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the referral. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a referral under subsection (F)(1) of this section, the commissioner shall review the referral and may conduct an audit of the taxpayer that is the subject of the referral based on the information in the referral and any other relevant information available to the commissioner. 
(3)  Nothing in subsection (F) of this section shall be construed as forming the sole basis upon which the commissioner may conduct an audit of a taxpayer. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a municipal corporation from filing a writ of mandamus if the municipal corporation believes that the commissioner has violated the commissioner's fiduciary duty as the administrator of the tax levied by the municipal corporation. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.26. - Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds. 
(A)  (1)  For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual return. Such return, long with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under ORC 718.88, shall be submitted to the tax commissioner, on a form and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year. 
(2)  If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with ORC 718.81, 718.82, and, if applicable, 718.86 onto its annual return. 
(3)  The remittance shall be made payable to the treasurer of state and in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. If the amount payable with the tax return is ten dollars or less, no remittance is required. 
(B)  The tax commissioner shall immediately forward to the treasurer of state all amounts the commissioner receives pursuant to ORC 718.80-718.95. The treasurer shall credit ninety-nine and one-half percent of such amounts to the municipal income tax fund and the remainder to the municipal income tax administrative fund established under ORC 5745.03. 
(C)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  (a)  The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the commissioner under ORC 718.80-718.95, copies of any relevant documents or other information. 
(b)  A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the tax commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the tax commissioner. The department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or before January 1, 2019. 
(3)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the tax commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax. 
(D)  (1)  Automatic Extensions. 
(a)  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. 
(b)  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request. 
(c)  An extension of time to file under subsection (D)(1) of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the tax commissioner grants an extension of that date. 
(2)  If the commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with ORC 718.04, the commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(E)  Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the tax commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the commissioner to contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person. 
(F)  When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a tax return preparer, the tax commissioner shall accept a facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.27. - Electronic filing. 
(A)  All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under ORC 718.80 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(B)  A taxpayer may apply to the commissioner, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the commissioner may excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or make the payments by nonelectronic means. 
(C)  The tax commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following: 
(1)  The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and make payments by electronic means; 
(2)  The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by electronic means. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.28. - Consolidated returns. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Affiliated group of corporations means an affiliated group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  Consolidated federal income tax return means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Consolidated federal taxable income means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Incumbent local exchange carrier has the same meaning as in section 4927.01. 
(5)  Local exchange telephone service has the same meaning as in section 5727.01. 
(B)  (1)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to a tax imposed in accordance with ORC 718.04 in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under subsection (B)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the tax commissioner. The tax commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return election period in effect under subsection (B)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(4)  When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under ORC 718.80, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (B)(1) or (2) of ORC 718.06 is binding upon the tax commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(5)  When an election made under ORC 718.80 is terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(C)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the tax commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(D)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States department of treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(E)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (E)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in ORC 718.81, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (B) of ORC 718.81 to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
(a)  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in ORC 718.82, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(b)  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in ORC 718.82, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
(a)  The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in ORC 718.82, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 
(b)  The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with ORC 718.80-718.95 on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(F)  Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the computations required under ORC 718.82 by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(G)  Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts applicable under ORC 718.80-718.95 or Chapter 5703. to the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.29. - Failure to pay tax. 
If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under ORC 718.80 fails to pay any tax as required under ORC 718.80-718.95, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by ORC 5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under ORC 718.90, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.30. - Declaration of estimated taxes. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Combined tax liability means the total amount of a taxpayer's income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year. 
(2)  Estimated taxes means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable year. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the tax commissioner, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the commissioner. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  The tax commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors. 
(C)  Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and remit estimated taxes to, the tax commissioner at the times and in the amounts prescribed in subsection (C)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made payable to the treasurer of state. 
(1)  The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows: 
(a)  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(b)  On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(c)  On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(d)  On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, ninety percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of estimated taxes. 
(3)  (a)  Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable year. 
(b)  Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section, the commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the treasurer of state. The treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in division (B) of ORC 718.85. 
(D)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by ORC 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in subsection (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(b)  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(c)  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(d)  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently due. 
(3)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under ORC 718.80-718.95 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with ORC 718.83. 
(E)  An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety percent of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one hundred percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for that year. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.31. - Additional penalties. 
(A)  In addition to any other penalty imposed by sections 718.80 to 718.95 or Chapter 5703., the following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under ORC 718.80-718.95 fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the tax commissioner, the commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding twenty-five dollars per month or fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars. 
(2)  If a person required to file a tax return electronically under ORC 718.80-718.95 fails to do so, the commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the following: 
(a)  For each of the first two failures, five percent of the amount required to be reported on the return; 
(b)  For the third and any subsequent failure, ten percent of the amount required to be reported on the return. 
(3)  If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under ORC 718.80 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this chapter, the commissioner may impose a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the amount not timely paid. 
(4)  If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by ORC 718.80-718.95 that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or impede the administration of ORC 718.80-718.95, a penalty of up to five hundred dollars may be imposed. 
(5)  If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under ORC 718.80-718.95, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars or one hundred percent of the tax required to be shown on the return. 
(6)  If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under ORC 718.91, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars or one hundred percent of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed under ORC 718.90 without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by division (A) of that section. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the return. 
(C)  Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed under this section may be abated by the tax commissioner. The commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties. 
(D)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under ORC 718.80-718.95 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations under ORC 718.83. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.32. - Assessments against taxpayer. 
(A)  If any taxpayer required to file a return under ORC 718.80 to 718.95 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the tax commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the commissioner's possession. 
The tax commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall extend the three-year time limit in ORC 718.91 for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment as required by ORC 718.80-718.95, or that files a fraudulent return. The commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in ORC 5703.37. With the notice, the commissioner shall provide instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition. 
(B)  Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the tax commissioner within sixty days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the taxpayer to the treasurer of state. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by the commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the commissioner shall proceed under ORC 5703.60. 
(C)  After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the tax commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin county. Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the tax commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to sales made under the judgment. If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within sixty days after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by ORC 5703.47 from the day the commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for collection under ORC 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by ORC 5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section. 
(D)  All money collected under this section shall be credited to the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section. 
(E)  If the tax commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are instituted without delay, the commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by subsection (C) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in ORC 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in accordance with subsection (B) of this section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the commissioner's consideration of the petition for reassessment. 
(F)  Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the treasurer of state does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition. If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is corrected by the tax commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a decision of the board of tax appeals or any court to which the determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by ORC 718.91, with interest on that amount as provided by that section. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.32.5. - Refund applications. 
(A)  An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under ORC 718.80-718.95, including assessments, shall be filed with the tax commissioner within three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period allowed by division (A) of ORC 718.90. The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(B)  (1)  On the filing of a refund application, the tax commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or assessment. If the amount is greater than ten dollars and not less than that claimed, the commissioner shall certify that amount to the director of budget and management and the treasurer of state for payment from the tax refund fund created in ORC 5703.052. If the amount is greater than ten dollars but less than that claimed, the commissioner shall proceed in accordance with ORC 5703.70. 
(2)  Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under ORC 718.83. 
(C)  Any portion of a refund determined under subsection (B) of this section that is not issued within ninety days after such determination shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by ORC 5703.47 from the ninety-first day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid or credited. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.33. - Amended returns. 
(A)  If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under ORC 718.80 and used to determine the tax due under ORC 718.80-718.95 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the internal revenue service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the tax commissioner in such form as the commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than sixty days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the commissioner before filing the amended return. 
(B)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a return subject to assessment under ORC 718.90 for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section, together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return. 
(C)  In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed under this division within the sixty-day period prescribed for filing the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in ORC 718.91, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in ORC 718.91. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.34. - Examination of records and other documents and persons. 
(A)  The tax commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to ORC 718.80-718.95 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(B)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to ORC 718.80-718.95 shall be open to the tax commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the commissioner, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the commissioner determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation. 
(C)  The tax commissioner may examine under oath any person that the commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(D)  No person issued written notice by the tax commissioner compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.35. - Credits. 
(A)  A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of a municipal corporation pursuant to ORC 718.15 or 718.151, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under ORC 718.80, against the municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following information to the tax commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the thirty-first day of January of the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit: 
(1)  A copy of the agreement entered into by the municipal corporation and taxpayer under ORC 718.15 or 718.151; 
(2)  A copy of the municipal ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement entered into between the municipal corporation and the taxpayer. 
(B)  (1)  Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the municipal corporation granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit is to be applied. 
(2)  Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the tax commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered into by a municipal corporation and taxpayer under ORC 718.15 or 718.151, or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.36. - Reckless violations; penalties. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, whoever recklessly violates division (A) of ORC 718.84 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. 
(B)  Any person who recklessly discloses information received from the internal revenue service in violation of division (A) of ORC 718.84 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. 
(C)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (A) of ORC 718.84 constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 55-17 . Passed 10-23-2017.) 
Sec. 142.97. - Collection after termination of chapter. 
(A)  This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in Section 142.19. 
(B)  Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Section 142.091 as though the same were continuing. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.98. - Savings clause. 
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the legislative authority of the Municipality that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 142.99. - Violations; penalty. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, whoever violates Section 142.15 of this chapter, subsection (A) of Section 142.14 of this chapter, or Section 142.051 of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both. 
(B)  Any person who discloses information received from the Internal Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Sec. 7213(A), 7213A, or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both. 
(C)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of subsection (A) of Section 142.14 of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(D)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the M4 degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the M1 degree. By way of an illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions: 
(1)  Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter; 
(2)  Knowingly make any incomplete return; 
(3)  Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter; 
(4)  Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from qualifying wages of employees to the Municipality municipal corporation as required by Section 142.051; 
(5)  Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from employees; 
(6)  Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; 
(7)  Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; 
(8)  Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with respect to such person's income or net profits, or in the case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers' income or net profits, such person's employer's income or net profits; 
(9)  Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; 
(10)  To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; 
(11)  Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax Administrator false information; 
(12)  Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable year in accordance with this chapter; or 
(13)  Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter. 
(14)  For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of that violation. 
(15)  For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in Section 142.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this chapter. 
(E)  The City, at the discretion of the Tax Administrator, may institute civil actions to recover income taxes, penalties and interest on municipal income taxes. 
(Ord. 33-15. Passed 10-8-15.) 
CHAPTER 143. - HOTEL TAX 

Sec. 143.01. - Levy; collection. 
(A)  Pursuant to ORC 5739.02(C)1, there is hereby levied a municipal excise tax of three percent (3%) on all transactions within the City of Marysville where lodging by a hotel is or is to be furnished to transient guests. 
(B)  Said tax shall be in full force and effect from and after thirty (30) days from the date of its passage. 
(C)  The tax collected, less the real and actual cost of administering said tax, shall be deposited in the Municipal General Fund. 
(Ord. 35-02. Passed 7-25-2002.) 
TITLE NINE - JUDICIAL 
CHAPTER 161. - MUNICIPAL COURT[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of ORC 1901.01 established the Marysville Municipal Court which, pursuant to ORC 1901.02 has territorial jurisdiction within Union County. The powers, duties and proceedings of the Court are established by ORC Ch. 1901. ORC 1901.25 provides that the Municipal Court may provide by rule how jurors shall be chosen. Jurors' fees in any criminal case involving the violation of a City ordinance shall be paid out of the City Treasury. The Municipal Court, pursuant to ORC 1901.26(A), may establish a schedule of fees and costs to be taxed in any action or proceeding, whether civil or criminal. ORC 1901.31(F) provides that fines received for violation of Marysville ordinances shall be paid into the City Treasury. Rule 13 of the Ohio Traffic Rules as promulgated by the Ohio Supreme Court provides that a court must establish a Traffic Violations Bureau and specified certain restrictions as to the designated offenses and schedule of fines to be accepted as waiver payment in lieu of court appearance. Rule 11 of the Rules of Superintendence for Municipal and County Courts also prescribes a violations bureau for minor misdemeanors. 
State Law reference- Release of Court Clerk's liability for loss of funds, ORC 131.18 et seq.; municipal court, ORC Ch. 1901; bond for Court Clerk required, ORC 1901.31(D); notification to Director of liquor law convictions ORC 4301.991; record of traffic violations, ORC 4513.37. 

Sec. 161.01. - Clerk salary. 
The salary of the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be as established by Council. 
Sec. 161.02. - Acting bailiff. 
The person appointed as Acting Bailiff from time to time by the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be paid such money as is provided by Ordinance for each day or part thereof during which such person is called upon to act as Bailiff. 
Sec. 161.03. - Reimbursement of expenses of confinement. 
(A)  A person who has been convicted of an offense other than a minor misdemeanor, and who is confined in the County Jail as provided in ORC 1905.35, shall reimburse the City for its expenses incurred by reason of such person's confinement, including, but not limited to, the expenses relating to the provision of food, clothing and shelter. The amount of reimbursement shall be determined by the Court at a hearing held pursuant to subsection (B) hereof. 
(B)  When the Judge of the Municipal Court sentences a person, under these Codified Ordinances, to a term of imprisonment for an offense, other than a minor misdemeanor, the Judge shall also hold a hearing to determine whether or not such person has the ability to pay the reimbursement. Such person shall have an opportunity to be heard and may be represented by counsel at such hearing, at his or her option. A record shall be made of the hearing. 
(C)  Reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to, the expenses relating to the provision of food, clothing and shelter to the person while he or she is imprisoned and during any time that such person is incarcerated before sentencing, if such time is credited against his or her term of imprisonment. The reimbursement shall be made to the City for expenses incurred by such person during any time that the person serves in a local jail. 
(D)  Before holding a hearing on reimbursement pursuant to this section, the Judge shall investigate or cause to be investigated the person's ability to pay the reimbursement and possible reimbursement schedules and methods. The amount of reimbursement shall be determined at the hearing in light of the sentence of imprisonment given and according to the person's ability to pay. However, the actual amount to be paid shall not exceed the actual cost of the confinement or forty dollars ($40.00) for each day of confinement, whichever is less. In determining the convicted person's ability to pay, all of the following shall be considered: 
(1)  His or her financial resources, excluding the funds saved from wages derived from his or her labor or employment during the period of incarceration; 
(2)  Any obligation to support his or her dependents; 
(3)  Any obligation to make restitution to the victim of the offense of which he or she is convicted; and 
(4)  His or her income, assets, liabilities, ability to borrow, household expenses and any other factor that may affect his or her financial ability to make reimbursement. 
(E)  The Director of Law may institute an appropriate civil action in the name of the City in the County Court of Common Pleas to recover, from the person incarcerated, reimbursement for the expenses of his or her confinement in the County Jail, as determined by a Court pursuant to subsection (B) hereof. The action shall be brought within one year after the person is released from incarceration. The amount recovered shall be paid into the City Treasury. 
(Ord. 55-84. Passed 12-13-1984.) 
PART THREE - TRAFFIC CODE 
  
TITLE ONE - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 301. - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Funeral procession defined, 331.24; street racing defined, 333.07; studded tire defined, 339.11; blind person defined, 371.02; snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all purpose vehicle defined, 375.01, school zones defined, 333.03(B). 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law. 

Sec. 301.01. - Meaning of words and phrases. 
The following words and phrases when used in this Traffic Code, except as otherwise provided, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
Sec. 301.02. - Agricultural tractor. 
Agricultural tractor means every self-propelling vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery but having no provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for agricultural purposes. 
(ORC 4511.01(J)) 
Sec. 301.03. - Alley. 
Alley means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that has been declared an alley by Council. 
(ORC 4511.01(XX)) 
Sec. 301.031. - Beacon; hybrid beacon. 
(A)  Beacon means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that operate in a flashing mode. 
(ORC 4511.01(KKK)) 
(B)  Hybrid beacon means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal indications. 
(ORC 4511.01(LLL)) 
Sec. 301.04. - Bicycle; motorized bicycle; moped. 
(A)  Bicycle means every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power, upon which a person may ride and that has two or more wheels any of which is more than fourteen inches in diameter. 
(ORC 4511.01(G)) 
(B)  Motorized bicycle or moped means any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than fifty cubic centimeters piston displacement which produces no more than one brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater than twenty miles per hour on a level surface. 
(ORC 4511.01(H)) 
Sec. 301.05. - Bus. 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing arrangement as defined in ORC 4511.01, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
(ORC 4511.01(L)) 
Sec. 301.06. - Business district. 
Business district means the territory fronting upon a street or highway, including the street or highway, between successive intersections where fifty percent or more of the frontage between such successive intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or where fifty percent or more of the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic control devices. 
(ORC 4511.01(NN)) 
Sec. 301.07. - Commercial tractor. 
Commercial tractor means every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a portion of such other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both. 
(ORC 4511.01(I)) 
Sec. 301.08. - Controlled-access highway. 
Controlled-access highway means every street or highway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway. 
(ORC 4511.01(CC)) 
Sec. 301.09. - Crosswalk. 
Crosswalk means: 
(A)  That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway; 
(B)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface; 
(C)  Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) hereof, there shall not be a crosswalk where authorized signs have been placed indicating no crossing. 
(ORC 4511.01(LL)) 
Sec. 301.10. - Driver or operator. 
Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.01(Y)) 
Sec. 301.11. - Emergency vehicle. 
Emergency vehicle means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county departments or public utility corporations when identified as such as required by law, the Ohio Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer. 
(ORC 4511.01(D)) 
Sec. 301.12. - Explosives. 
Explosives means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of destroying life or limb. 
Manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantities, of such nature or in such packing, that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of such units, to the injury of life, limb or property by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches. 
(ORC 4511.01(T)) 
Sec. 301.13. - Expressway. 
Expressway means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access with an excess of fifty percent of all crossroads separated in grade. 
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ)) 
Sec. 301.14. - Flammable liquid. 
Flammable liquid means any liquid that has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device. 
(ORC 4511.01(U)) 
Sec. 301.15. - Freeway. 
Freeway means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with all crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access. 
(ORC 4511.01(YY)) 
Sec. 301.16. - Gross weight. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
(ORC 4511.01(V)) 
Sec. 301.161. - Highway maintenance vehicle. 
Highway maintenance vehicle means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities. 
(ORC 4511.01(QQQ)) 
Sec. 301.162. - Highway traffic signal. 
Highway traffic signal means a power-operated traffic control device by which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. Highway traffic signal does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement markers, warning light, or steady burning electric lamp. 
(ORC 4511.01(MMM)) 
Sec. 301.17. - Intersection. 
Intersection means: 
(A)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device. 
(B)  If a highway includes two roadways that are thirty feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways include two roadways thirty feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection. 
(C)  At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in subsection (B) of this section: 
(1)  If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection. 
(2)  Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the intersection. 
(3)  Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far side of the crosswalk. 
(ORC 4511.01(KK)) 
Sec. 301.18. - Laned street or highway. 
Laned street or highway means a street or highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
(ORC 4511.01(GG)) 
Sec. 301.181. - Median. 
Median means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection. 
(ORC 4511.01(NNN)) 
Sec. 301.19. - Motorcycle. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to, motor vehicles known as motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, autocycle, , cab-enclosed motorcycle or motorcycle without regard to weight or brake horsepower. 
(ORC 4511.01(C)) 
Sec. 301.20. - Motor vehicle. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power, except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work and not designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less. 
(ORC 4511.01(B)) 
Sec. 301.201. - Operate. 
Operate means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.01(HHH)) 
Sec. 301.21. - Park or parking. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
Sec. 301.22. - Pedestrian. 
Pedestrian means any natural person afoot. 
(ORC 4511.01(X)) 
Sec. 301.23. - Person. 
Person means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
(ORC 4511.01(W)) 
Sec. 301.24. - Pole trailer. 
Pole trailer means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connection. 
(ORC 4511.01(O)) 
Sec. 301.25. - Police officer. 
Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(ORC 4511.01(Z)) 
Sec. 301.251. - Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense. 
Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense means any of the following: 
(A)  A violation of ORC 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or 4511.84; 
(B)  A violation of division (A)(2) of ORC 4511.17, divisions (A) to (D) of ORC 4511.51, or division (A) of ORC 4511.74; 
(C)  A violation of any provision of ORC 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated; 
(D)  A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any section or provision set forth or described in subsection (A) to (C) of this section. 
(ORC 4511.01(III)) 
Sec. 301.26. - Private road or driveway. 
(A)  Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
(ORC 4511.01(DD)) 
(B)  Private road open to public travel means a private toll road or road, including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel without access restrictions. Private road open to public travel includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within a private gated property where access is restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private grade crossing. 
(ORC 4511.01(OOO)) 
Sec. 301.27. - Public safety vehicle. 
Public safety vehicle means any of the following: 
(A)  Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a municipal corporation, township or county and private ambulances and transport vehicles bearing license plates issued under ORC 4503.49; 
(B)  Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or the Municipality; 
(C)  Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or directives of that service. The Ohio Fire Marshal shall be designated by the Ohio Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety vehicles described in this subsection (C); 
(D)  Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used by volunteer fire fighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department service when identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be considered a public safety vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a hospital regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital. 
(ORC 4511.01(E)) 
(E)  Vehicles used by the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified in ORC 5503.34. 
Sec. 301.28. - Railroad. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed principally on a private right-of-way. 
(ORC 4511.01(P)) 
Sec. 301.29. - Railroad sign or signal. 
Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
(ORC 4511.01(SS)) 
Sec. 301.30. - Railroad train. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, or an electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad. 
(ORC 4511.01(Q)) 
Sec. 301.31. - Residence district. 
Residence district means the territory, not comprising a business district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
(ORC 4511.01(00)) 
Sec. 301.32. - Right-of-way. 
Right-of-way means either of the following, as the context requires: 
(A)  The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it or the individual is moving in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into its or the individual's path; 
(B)  A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes. When used in this context, right-of-way includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way limits under the control of the State or local authority. 
(ORC 4511.01(UU)) 
Sec. 301.321. - Road service vehicle. 
Road service vehicle means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state, county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights. 
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ)) 
Sec. 301.33. - Roadway. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively. 
(ORC 4511.01(EE)) 
Sec. 301.34. - Safety zone. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times. 
(ORC 4511.01(MM)) 
Sec. 301.35. - School bus. 
School bus means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers that is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function; provided school bus does not include a bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of the Municipality, or within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediately contiguous to the Municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public Utilities Commission unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function, and school bus does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than fifteen children in the van or bus at any time. Child day-care center and type A family day-care home have the same meanings as in ORC 5104.01. 
(ORC 4511.01(F), (FFF)) 
Sec. 301.36. - Semitrailer. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.01(N)) 
Sec. 301.361. - Shared-use path. 
Shared-use path means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separate from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized users. 
(ORC 4511.01(PPP)) 
Sec. 301.37. - Sidewalk. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(ORC 4511.01(FF)) 
Sec. 301.38. - State route. 
State route means every highway that is designated with an official State route number and so marked. 
(ORC 4511.01(JJ)) 
Sec. 301.39. - Stop (when required). 
Stop when required means a complete cessation of movement. 
Sec. 301.40. - Stopping or standing. 
(A)  Stop or stopping when prohibited means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. 
(B)  Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise then temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Sec. 301.41. - Stop intersection. 
Stop intersection means any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop signs are erected. 
(ORC 4511.01(BBB)) 
Sec. 301.42. - Street or highway; arterial street. 
(A)  Street or highway are synonymous and mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(ORC 4511.01(BB)) 
(B)  Arterial street means any United States or State numbered route, controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways. 
(ORC 4511.01(CCC)) 
Sec. 301.43. - Through street or highway. 
Through street or highway means every street or highway as provided in Section 313.02. 
(ORC 4511.01(HH)) 
Sec. 301.44. - Thruway. 
Thruway means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited. 
(ORC 4511.01(AAA)) 
Sec. 301.45. - Traffic. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel any street or highway or private road open to public travel. 
(ORC 4511.01(TT)) 
Sec. 301.46. - Traffic control device. 
Traffic control device means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction. 
(ORC 4511.01(QQ)) 
Sec. 301.47. - Traffic control signal. 
Traffic control signal means any highway traffic signal by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
(ORC 4511.01(RR)) 
Sec. 301.48. - Trailer. 
Trailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any such vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than twenty-five miles per hour. 
(ORC 4511.01(M)) 
Sec. 301.49. - Truck. 
Truck means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property. 
(ORC 4511.01(K)) 
Sec. 301.50. - Urban district. 
Urban district means the territory contiguous to and including any street or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for distance of a quarter of a mile or more, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic control devices. 
(ORC 4511.01(PP)) 
Sec. 301.51. - Vehicle. 
Vehicle means every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except that vehicle does not include any motorized wheelchair, electric personal assistive mobility device, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power. 
(ORC 4511.01(A)) 
Sec. 301.52. - Wheelchair, motorized. 
Motorized wheelchair means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by, a handicapped person and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight miles per hour. 
(ORC 4511.01(EEE)) 
CHAPTER 303. - ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDING AND PENALTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles,  331.20, 333.06. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; disposition of unclaimed vehicles, ORC 737.32, 4513.62 et seq.; citations for minor misdemeanors, ORC 2935.26 et seq.; power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain violations, ORC 4507.16, 4507.34; state point system suspension, ORC 4507.40; uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, ORC 4511.06; marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, ORC 4549.13; distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, ORC 4549.15. 

Sec. 303.01. - Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing. 
(A)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(B)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply with an order or signal of a police officer. A violation of subsection (A) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of subsection (B) is a misdemeanor of the first degree, unless the jury or judge as trier of fact finds any one of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt: 
(1)  In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony; 
(2)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of subsection (B) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in ORC 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense under this section, in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in division (A)(1) of that section. The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set forth in ORC 4510.021. No judge shall suspend the first three years of suspension under a class two suspension of an offender's license, permit or privilege required by this division on any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection. 
(ORC 2921.331) 
Sec. 303.02. - Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guard. 
(A)  Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this Traffic Code. Firemen, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or fireman issued pursuant to this section. 
(B)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be assigned. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 303.03. - Officer may remove ignition key. 
A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or highway, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. The officer removing such key shall place notification upon the vehicle detailing his name and badge number, the place where such key may be reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming such key. The key shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership. 
(ORC 4549.05) 
Sec. 303.04. - Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted. 
(A)  The provisions of this Traffic Code do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area designated by traffic control devices, but apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(B)  The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as are required by law, and such lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of Sections 331.01 to 331.04, 331.06 to 331.08, 331.31, 333.04, 337.01 and ORC 4511.66 and 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(C)  (1)  This section does not exempt a driver of as highway maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Sections 331.01 to 331.04, 331.06 to 331.08, 331.31, 333.04, 337.01 or ORC 4511.66 or 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(2)  This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of ORC 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(D)  As used in this section, engaged in the performance of official duties includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location. 
(ORC 4511.04) 
Sec. 303.041. - Emergency, public safety and coroner's vehicles exempt. 
(A)  ORC 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69 and all sections of this Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to the sections listed above, do not apply to the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(ORC 4511.041) 
(B)  ORC 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and 4511.66, and all sections of this Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to the sections listed above, do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle in accordance with ORC 4513.171. This section does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(ORC 4511.042) 
Sec. 303.05. - Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway. 
Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of such sections which by their nature are inapplicable. 
(ORC 4511.05) 
Sec. 303.06. - Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals. 
(A)  No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall: 
(1)  As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance; 
(2)  Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals; a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for bicycle use; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor driven cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works or official duties. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.051) 
Sec. 303.07. - Application to drivers of government vehicles. 
The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this Municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and public safety vehicles. 
Sec. 303.08. - Impounding of vehicles; redemption. 
(A)  Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations. 
(2)  When any vehicle or abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in ORC 4513.63 is left on private property for more than forty-eight consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway, for forty-eight consecutive hours or longer, without notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in such place. Prior to disposal of an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in ORC 4513.63, it shall be photographed by a law enforcement officer. 
(3)  When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of the owner and is located upon either public or private property. 
(4)  When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to display the current lawfully required plates and is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(5)  When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission of a felony and is located upon either public or private property. 
(6)  When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property, and is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(7)  When any vehicle is left unattended either on public or private property due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator, or due to the abandonment thereof by the operator during or immediately after pursuit by a law enforcement officer. 
(8)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to stop in case of an accident or collision and is located either on public or private property. 
(9)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving without a lawful license or while his license has been suspended or revoked and is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(10)  When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required, and is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(B)  Any vehicle removed under authority of subsection (A)(2) hereof shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under ORC 4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall be ordered into storage and the Municipal police shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall appear at the police offices to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges. 
(C)  No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the owner or operator, shall constitute prima-facie evidence that it was so removed by the owner or operator. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 303.081. - Impounding vehicles on private residential or agricultural property. 
(A)  (1)  The Chief of Police upon complaint of any person adversely affected may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in ORC 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property. The Chief of Police, upon complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this section, the Chief of Police may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall designate a storage facility. 
(2)  A towing service towing a motor vehicle under subsection (A)(1) of this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that subsection. The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing service. 
(3)  Subject to subsection (B) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this subsection may recover the vehicle only in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. 
(4)  As used in this section private residential property means private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. Private residential property does not include any private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by two or more persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. 
(B)  If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section arrives after the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle. However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction. 
Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable. 
(C)  (1)  The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the Chief orders into storage pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle's license number, make, model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of the removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The Chief of Police shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location. 
(2)  Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the Police Chief's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under subsection (A)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location. 
(D)  (1)  The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following: 
(a)  Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25 or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the municipal corporation. 
(b)  Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under ORC 4513.611. 
(2)  Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage under subsection (A)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice required under division (B)(3) of ORC 4513.69, if applicable. The owner of a motor vehicle shall not do either of the following: 
(a)  Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the sheriff or chief of police, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal investigation; 
(b)  Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability. 
For purposes of subsection (D)(2) of this section, personal items do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle. 
(3)  If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for thirty days, the procedures established by ORC 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply. 
(E)  (1) No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other than in accordance with subsection (A)(1) of this section or ORC 4513.61 to 4513.65. 
(2)  No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(F)  This section does not apply to any private residential or private agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with Section 303.082. 
(G)  Whoever violates subsection (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.60) 
Sec. 303.082. - Private tow-away zones. 
(A)  The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign, that is at least eighteen inches by twenty-four inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information: 
(a)  A statement that the property is a tow-away zone; 
(b)  A description of persons authorized to park on the property. If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is located, or the name of the business that is located on the property designated as a private tow-away zone. 
(c)  If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times, the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced; 
(d)  The telephone number and the address of the place from which a towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night; 
(e)  A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in division (B) of ORC 4505.101. 
In order to comply with the requirements of subsection (A)(1) of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the sign. 
(2)  A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this section is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with all of the following: 
(a)  It is located within twenty-five linear miles of the location of the private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a place of storage within twenty-five linear miles. 
(b)  It is well-lighted. 
(c)  It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which the private tow-away zone is located. 
(B)  (1)  If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with subsection (A) of this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this section. The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by the Public Service Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in ORC 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this section, subject to subsection (C) of this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with subsection (G) of this section. 
(2)  If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle pursuant to subsection (B) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed tow truck operator. 
(3)  No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone is located. 
(C)  If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under authority of subsection (B) of this section, arrives after the vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to the actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle established by the Public Service Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction. Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation. 
(D)  (1)  Prior to towing a vehicle under subsection (B) of this section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under subsection (A) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and date of the photographs taken under this section. The towing service shall retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or printed form, for at least thirty days after the date on which the vehicle is recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier. 
(2)  A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under subsection (B) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing service. 
(E)  (1)  If an owner of a private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with subsection (A) of this section causes the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under subsection (B) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the vehicle, shall provide notice to the Police Department concerning all of the following: 
(a)  The vehicle's license number, make, model and color; 
(b)  The location from which the vehicle was removed; 
(c)  The date and time the vehicle was removed; 
(d)  The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may be recovered; 
(e)  The address of the place from which the vehicle may be recovered. 
(2)  The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private property in the Chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the Chief has received notice under this section. The record shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner, operator or lienholder of the vehicle, and requests information pertaining to the vehicle. 
(F)  (1)  When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance with this section, within three days of the removal, the towing service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall insure that such information is provided in a timely manner. Subject to subsection (F)(4) of this section, the towing service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known lienholder as follows: 
(a)  Within five business days after the Registrar of Motor Vehicles provides the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner's and lienholder's last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt; 
(b)  If the vehicle remains unclaimed thirty days after the first notice is sent, in the manner required under subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section; 
(c)  If the vehicle remains unclaimed forty-five days after the first notice is sent, in the manner required under subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section. 
(2)  Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to subsection (F)(1) of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under subsection (B) of ORC 4505.101, may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to the motor vehicle as provided in that section. 
(3)  A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible, shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to the motor vehicle under division (B) of ORC 4505.101. 
(4)  With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under ORC 4505.101, the towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice required under subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section. 
(G)  (1)  The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under subsection (B) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following: 
(a)  Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle or a lease agreement; 
(b)  Payment of the following fees: 
i.  All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under ORC 4921.25, except that the lienholder of a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent under subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section; 
ii.  If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as described in subsection (F) of this section, a processing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle that is removed under authority of subsection (B) of this section shall show the vehicle owner, operator or lienholder who contests the removal of the vehicle all photographs taken under subsection (D) of this section. Upon request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper, electronic, or otherwise. 
(3)  When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under ORC 4513.611. 
(4)  Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed under authority of subsection (B) of this section may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of subsection (G)(4) of this section, personal items do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle. 
(H)  No person shall remove, or cause the removal of any vehicle from private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this section, or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this section, or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of this section. 
(I)  This section does not affect or limit the operation of ORC 4513.60 or ORC 4513.61 to 4613.65 as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under subsection (A) of this section. 
(J)  Whoever violates subsection (H) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(K)  As used in this section, owner of a private property or owner of the private property includes, with respect to a private property, any of the following: 
(1)  Any person who holds title to the property; 
(2)  Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease or sublease agreement for the property; 
(3)  A person who is authorized to manage the property; 
(4)  A duly authorized agent of any person listed in subsections (K)(1) to (3) of this section. 
(ORC 4513.601) 
Sec. 303.083. - Release of vehicle; records; charges. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former Section 303.083 as amended are now codified in Section 303.081. 
Sec. 303.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 44-18 ,  I, adopted June 25, 2018, repealed  303.09, which pertained to leaving junk and other vehicles on private or public property without permission or notification. 
Sec. 303.10. - Leaving junk vehicles on private property with permission of owner. 
(A)  For the purposes of this section, junk motor vehicle means any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of ORC 4513.63(B) to (E) that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than seventy-two hours with the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under authority of ORC 4737.05 to 4737.12; or regulated under authority of the Municipality; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation, or if the motor vehicle is a collector's vehicle. 
Persons may store or keep by unrestricted method any collector's vehicle as defined in ORC 4501.01(F) on private property with the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; except that such person having such permission shall conceal, by means of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable obstruction, any unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open. 
Council, the Chief of Police or the Municipal Zoning Authority, may send notice by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure or shall be removed from the property. 
No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima-facie evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice. Each subsequent period of thirty days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate offense. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.65) 
Sec. 303.11. - Providing false information to police officer. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a false name, social security number or date of birth to a law enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or complaint. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4513.361) 
Sec. 303.99. - General traffic code penalties. 
(A)  General Misdemeanor Classifications. Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
(B)  Penalties. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this Traffic Code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as provided in this section. 
Classification 
of Misdemeanor Maximum Term 
of Imprisonment Maximum Fine First degree 180 days $1,000.00 Second degree 90 days $750.00 Third degree 60 days $500.00 Fourth degree 30 days $250.00 Minor No imprisonment $150.00  
  
(ORC 2929.24; 2929.28) 
CHAPTER 305. - TRAFFIC CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs,  313.02. 
State Law reference- Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway, ORC 4511.011; power to enact local traffic regulations, ORC 4511.07, 4511.61; local traffic control devices, ORC 4511.11; alteration of prima-facie speed limits, ORC 4511.21, 4511.22(A), 4511.23; designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, ORC 4511.65. 

Sec. 305.01. - Authority and considerations for placement of devices. 
The Director of Administration is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic control devices upon any street or highway under his jurisdiction as are necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide traffic, and such other traffic control devices as he shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The Director shall determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall consider the following: 
(A)  The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic from physical injury or property damage. 
(B)  The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions. 
(C)  The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial measures. 
(D)  The recommendations of the Police and Fire Chiefs. 
(E)  The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles so as to expedite travel and promote public safety. 
(F)  The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking, standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting business concerns and places of assembly. 
(G)  Economy in the expenditure of money. 
Sec. 305.02. - Conformity with state manual. 
All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as set forth in ORC 4511.09. 
Sec. 305.03. - Powers of Director of Administration. 
The Director of Administration is hereby empowered to: 
(A)  Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required before entering the same; or in residence districts designate certain streets or highways or portions thereof not to be through streets or highways despite the erection of stop signs or other official traffic control devices at intersecting streets. 
(B)  Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection. 
(C)  Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required. 
(D)  Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction. 
(E)  Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(F)  Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction. 
(G)  Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal center line or offset marked lane line. 
(H)  Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at such intersections. 
(I)  Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to regulate traffic. 
(J)  Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets. 
(K)  Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in the process of construction, reconstruction or repair. 
(L)  Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(M)  Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones. 
(N)  Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat. 
(O)  Erect "No U Turn" signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
(P)  Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the prohibitions, restrictions or limitations. 
(Q)  Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(R)  Designate truck routes and streets or parts thereof where either a weight limit restriction or truck exclusion has been imposed by rule or regulation provided such is not in conflict with any legislation. 
(S)  Erect signs to prohibit a right turn against a steady red signal at any intersection, provided the approval of the Chief of Police and of Council is first obtained. 
Sec. 305.04. - Posting of signs and signals required. 
No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals, markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
Sec. 305.05. - Director's powers not limited. 
The powers of the Director of Administration shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter. 
Sec. 305.06. - Records Of Director. 
The Director of Administration shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter. 
Sec. 305.07. - Reservation of power to Council. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any decision of the Director of Administration and may assume any of the powers delegated to the Director, by legislation adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such legislation, the same may be changed only by amending or repealing legislation adopted by Council. 
Sec. 305.08. - Violations subject to misdemeanor classification. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection with this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be classified as provided in Section 303.99. 
TITLE THREE - STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
CHAPTER 311. - STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Dropping, sifting and leaking loads,  339.08. 
State Law reference- See sectional history for similar State law; power to regulate processions or assemblages, ORC 4511.07(C). 

Sec. 311.01. - Placing injurious material or obstruction in street. 
(A)  No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a street, highway or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such street, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof. 
(B)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any noxious, destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same. 
(C)  Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(D)  No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a street without proper authority. 
(E)  No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof. 
(F)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (E) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4511.74) 
Sec. 311.02. - Parades and assemblages. 
(A)  No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or participate in any parade, assemblage or procession other than a funeral procession upon any street or highway, or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from the Police Chief. 
Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade, procession or assemblage. 
The permit may be refused or cancelled if: 
(1)  The time, place, size or conduct of the parade including the assembly areas and route of march would unreasonably interfere with the public convenience and safe use of the streets and highways. 
(2)  The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the Municipality. 
(3)  The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably interfere with the movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment or ambulance service to other areas of the Municipality. 
(4)  The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued. 
(5)  The information contained in the application is found to be false, misleading or incomplete in any material detail. 
(6)  An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper conduct of the parade. 
The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe reasonable conditions, including the hours, the place of assembly and of dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions thereof which may be used or occupied. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 311.03. - Toy vehicles on streets. 
(A)  No person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any sled, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play streets. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 311.04. - Quiet zones; play streets. 
(A)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
(B)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residence is within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 472. Passed 3-27-1947.) 
Sec. 311.05. - In street charitable solicitation. 
(A)  The Director of Administration or the Director's designee may issue a permit to solicit contributions in City streets from the occupants of vehicles when all of the following requirements have been met. An organization may apply for and obtain a permit to solicit contributions in City streets as delineated in this section. 
(B)  The Director of Administration or the Director's designee shall prescribe a form and receive applications for permits to solicit contributions in City streets. 
(C)  A charity must be the recipient of the solicited contributions. Charity shall be defined as either: 
(1)  An organization having received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended. 
(2)  A group or individual that is not organization for profit that is applying funds received from solicitation to education, philanthropic, benevolent, welfare, or medical causes. 
(D)  The application shall specify the date and times for which the permit to solicit contributions in City streets is sought. A permit to solicit contributions in City street shall not be issued for more than two days each calendar year, and the solicitation activities shall occur between one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset on the approved date(s). 
(E)  The application shall specify the locations for which the permit to solicit contributions in City streets is sought. A permit to solicit contributions in City streets shall not be issued for more than three approved intersections. 
(F)  The application shall list the number of agents authorized to solicit contributions in the streets on behalf of the charity. 
(G)  A signed waiver of liability shall accompany the application from all agents authorized to solicit contributions in the streets on behalf of the charity for any and all claims that may arise as a result of soliciting contributions in the streets. 
(H)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to solicit contributions in the street, the Director of Administration or the Director's designee shall verify that the proposed solicitation at the locations and the date and times specified in the application does not conflict with previously issued parade permit or scheduled public event. No more than one permit shall be issued for the use of any intersection during any calendar day, and not more than one organization shall be permitted to solicit contributions in the right-of-way on the same calendar day. 
(I)  For each organization issued a permit to solicit contributions in the streets, the Police Chief shall be provided a copy of the organization's application; its permit; and the names of the agents authorized to solicit contributions in City streets on behalf of the charity. 
(J)  All agents soliciting contributions in streets on behalf of a charity shall possess a copy of such permit at all times during the period of such solicitation. 
(K)  All agents soliciting contributions in streets on behalf of a charity shall wear light-colored clothing and/or safety vests. 
(L)  The Director of Administration or the Director's designee shall have the authority to revoke an organization's permit to solicit contributions in City streets and the Director of Administration or the Director's designee or the Police Chief, in their sole discretion, may order any and all of an organization's agents to cease all activity if conditions become hazardous and/or inclement or if an organization's agents fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(M)  Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. Each day on which such activities are conducted in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 47-05. Passed 7-28-2005.) 
Sec. 311.06. - Sports equipment on and/or adjacent to streets. 
(A)  No owner of real property shall allow any permanent or portable sports equipment to be erected within the City right-of-way or on City property (for the purpose of playing sports in a traffic lane of any street.) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 41-12. Passed 9-13-2012.) 
CHAPTER 313. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic control devices defined,  301.46. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; designation of through streets or stop intersections, ORC 4511.07(F), 4511.65; uniform system of traffic control devices, ORC 4511.09, 4511.11(D); placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, ORC 4511.10, 4511.11. 

Sec. 313.01. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(A)  No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. 
No provisions of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.12) 
Sec. 313.02. - Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs. 
(A)  All State routes are hereby designated as through streets or highways, provided that stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals shall be erected at all intersections with such through streets or highways, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where two or more State routes that are through streets or highways intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Ohio Department of Transportation, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
Whenever the Ohio Director of Transportation or the Director of Administration, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 305, determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his jurisdiction. Before the Ohio Director of Transportation either installs or removes a stop sign under this paragraph, he shall give notice, in writing, of that proposed action to the Municipality at least thirty days before installing or removing the stop sign. 
(B)  Other streets or highways or portions thereof, are hereby designated through streets or highways, if they are within the Municipality, if they have a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of such street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have "stop" or "yield" signs or traffic control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of such street or highways or portion thereof, shall be a municipal corporation line, the physical terminus of the street or highways or any point on such street or highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided that in residence districts the Municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. Where two or more streets or highways designated under this subsection (B) intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Ohio Department of Transportation or by the Director of Administration and/or Council, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 305, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(C)  Stop signs need not be erected at intersections so constructed as to permit traffic to safely enter a through street or highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through street or highway. 
(D)  The Director of Administration and/or Council, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 305, may designate additional through streets or highways and shall erect stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals at all streets and highways intersecting such through streets or highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield intersection and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to such intersection. 
(Ord. 40-07. Passed 8-9-2007.) 
Sec. 313.03. - Traffic signal indications. 
Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles, and pedestrians shall have the following meanings: 
(A)  Steady Green Signal Indication. 
(1)  (a)  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left, or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
i.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
ii.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
(b)  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
(a)  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk. 
(b)  Other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(3)  (a)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication, as provided in Section 313.05, pedestrians facing a circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed. 
(b)  Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway. 
(B)  Steady Yellow Signal Indication. 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed. 
(3)  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in Section 313.05 or other traffic control device, shall not start to cross the roadway. 
(C)  Steady Red Signal Indication. 
(1)  (a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, before then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in subsections (C)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(b)  Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  (a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is displayed. 
(b)  When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow, and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(3)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in Section 313.05 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation on State highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection. 
(D)  Flashing Green Signal Indication. A flashing green signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used. 
(E)  Flashing Yellow Signal Indication. 
(1)  (a)  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
i.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
ii.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
(b)  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(2)  (a)  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously ent er the intersection only to m ake the m ovement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
i.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
ii.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
(b)  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(3)  Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed. 
(4)  When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. 
(F)  Flashing Red Signal Indication. 
(1)  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed. 
(3)  When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point. 
(G)  General Application. In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(H)  Exception. This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by ORC 4511.61 and 4511.62. 
(ORC 4511.13) 
Sec. 313.04. - Lane-use control signal indications. 
(A)  The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows: 
(1)  A steady downward green arrow: A road user is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located. 
(2)  A steady yellow "X": A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being made to a steady red "X" signal indication. 
(3)  A steady white two-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted. 
(4)  A steady white one-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel. 
(5)  A steady red "X": A road user is not permitted to use the lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present. 
(ORC 4511.131) 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.99) 
Sec. 313.05. - Special pedestrian control signals. 
(A)  Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "don't walk", or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in place, such signals shall indicate the following instructions: 
(1)  A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes "walk", means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person signal indication is first shown. 
(2)  A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes "don't walk", means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area. 
(3)  A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication. 
(4)  Nothing int his section shall be construed to invalidate the continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word "wait" if those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985. 
(5)  A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used. 
(ORC 4511.14) 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.99) 
Sec. 313.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- House Bill 349, effective April 23, 2018, repealed  313.06, which pertained to flashing traffic signals. 
Sec. 313.07. - Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising. 
(A)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any street any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic control devices by the owner of real property in accordance with ORC 4511.211 and 4511.432. 
Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public nuisance, and the Police Chief is authorized to remove it or cause it to be removed. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.16) 
Sec. 313.08. - Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices. 
(A)  No person without lawful authority, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any traffic control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of the device, sign or signal; 
(2)  Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an undried condition and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices intended to protect it; 
(3)  Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a manhole cover. 
(B)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (A)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (3) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.17) 
Sec. 313.09. - Driver's duties upon approaching ambiguous or non-working traffic signal. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following, if the signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way, or if the vehicle is a bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning, due to the failure of a vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle: 
(1)  Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop before entering the intersection; 
(2)  Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(3)  Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.132) 
Sec. 313.10. - Unlawful purchase, possession or sale. 
(A)  As used in this section, traffic control device means any sign, traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in accordance with the manual adopted under ORC 4511.09 by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and highways, but does not mean any pavement marking. 
(B)  No individual shall buy or otherwise possess or sell, a traffic control device, except when one of the following applies: 
(1)  In the course of the individual's employment by the State or a local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing, erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device; 
(2)  In the course of the individual's employment by any manufacturer of traffic control devices other than a State or local authority; 
(3)  For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a traffic control device to State or local officials; 
(4)  When the traffic control device has been purchased from the State or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit for use; 
(5)  The traffic control device has been properly purchased from a manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by the manufacturer. 
(C)  This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of ORC 2913.02 or a municipal ordinance relating to theft, or for receiving stolen property in violation of ORC 2913.51 or a municipal ordinance relating to receiving stolen property. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.18) 
Sec. 313.11. - Right turn on red prohibited. 
(A)  Right turns against a steady red signal are prohibited at intersections that are posted with signs indicating "no turn on red" or such other equivalent signs as approved by the Ohio Department of Transportation. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 40-07. Passed 8-9-2007.) 
Sec. 313.12. - Portable signal preemption devices prohibited. 
(A)  (1)  No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device. 
(2)  No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect the operation of a traffic control signal. 
(B)  Subsection (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following persons and subsection (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the following persons when responding to an emergency call: 
(1)  A peace officer, as defined in ORC 109.71(A)(11), (12), (14) or (19); 
(2)  A State highway patrol trooper; 
(3)  A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in ORC 4511.01(E)(1), (3) or (4). 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  As used in this section, portable signal preemption device means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic control signal to green out of sequence. 
(ORC 4511.031) 
TITLE FIVE - VEHICLES 
CHAPTER 331. - OPERATION GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Obedience to traffic control devices,  313.01; operation of bicycles and motorcycles,  373.01 et seq.; school bus operation, Ch. 4501-3. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law. 

Sec. 331.01. - Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions. 
(A)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic; 
(5)  When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control device. 
(B)  (1)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(b)  When preparing for a left turn; 
(c)  When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route. 
(2)  Nothing in subsection (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow overtaking by a faster vehicle. 
(C)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (A) (2) hereof. 
This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.25) 
Sec. 331.02. - Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions. 
(A)  Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is reasonably possible. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.26) 
Sec. 331.03. - Overtaking, passing to left; driver's duties. 
(A)  The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction: 
(1)  The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in subsection (A)(3) hereof, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a safe passing distance. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction on a divided street or highway as defined in Section 331.31, a limited access highway as defined in ORC 5511.02 or a highway with four or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly to the vehicle being overtaken and passed. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.27) 
Sec. 331.04. - Overtaking and passing upon right. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle. 
(B)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.28) 
Sec. 331.05. - Overtaking, passing to left of center. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made, without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for traffic approaching from the opposite direction before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.29) 
Sec. 331.06. - Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel; 
(3)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(B)  This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side or under the conditions described in Section 331.01(A)(2). 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.30) 
Sec. 331.07. - Hazardous or no passing zones. 
(A)  Hazardous zones, commonly called "no passing zones," shall consist of an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed parallel to the normal center line or marked lane line. When the auxiliary yellow line appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel and to the right of the normal center line or marked lane line, no driver shall drive across the auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. When auxiliary yellow lines appear on both sides of the normal center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding in either direction shall not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. No driver shall, at any other time, drive across the yellow auxiliary line when it appears in the driver's lane of travel, except to make a lawfully permitted left-hand turn under the rules governing such movement. No passing signs may also be erected facing traffic to indicate the beginning and end of each no passing zone. 
When appropriate signs or markings indicating hazardous or no passing zones are in place and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distance set out in Section 331.06. 
(B)  Subsection (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the speed limit applicable to that location. 
(2)  The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit. 
(3)  There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of Section 331.05, considering the speed of the slower vehicle. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.31) 
Sec. 331.08. - Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic. 
(A)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or wherever traffic is lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following rules apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from such lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs. 
(4)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.33) 
Sec. 331.09. - Following too closely. 
(A)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph does not prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks. 
Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, shall maintain a sufficient space between such vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.34) 
Sec. 331.10. - Turning at intersections. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to the traffic moving in that lane. 
(4)  Markers, buttons or signs may be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when such markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.36) 
Sec. 331.11. - Turning into private driveway, alley or building. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof. 
(3)  Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, private road, driveway or building. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 331.12. - "U" turns restricted. 
(A)  Except as provided in Section 313.03 and subsection (B) hereof, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction. 
(B)  The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction. This subsection applies only when the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This subsection does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(ORC 4511.37) 
(C)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety to other users of the street and without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.37) 
Sec. 331.13. - Starting and backing vehicles. 
(A)  No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on the street or highway. 
No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except: in a rest area; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.38) 
Sec. 331.14. - Signals before changing course, turning or stopping. 
(A)  No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway unless and until such person has exercised due care to ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle. 
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give a signal. 
Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic intention to turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles. 
The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with this section. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.39) 
Sec. 331.15. - Hand and arm signals. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, all signals required by this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(B)  As an alternative to subsection (A)(2) hereof, a person operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.40) 
Sec. 331.16. - Right-of-way at intersections. 
(A)  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(B)  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (A) hereof, is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code and ORC Chapter 4511. 
(ORC 4511.41) 
(C)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, when two vehicles approach or enter a junction of two or more alleys from different directions at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.41) 
Sec. 331.17. - Right-of-way when turning left. 
(A)  The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, whenever the approaching vehicle is within the intersection or so close to the intersection, alley, private road or driveway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.42) 
Sec. 331.18. - Operation of vehicle at yield signs. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima-facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.43(B)) 
Sec. 331.19. - Operation of vehicle at stop signs. 
(A)  Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.43(A)) 
Sec. 331.20. - Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs. 
(A)  The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.03) 
Sec. 331.21. - Right-of-way of public safety or coroner's vehicle. 
(A)  Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the street clear of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(B)  This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the street. 
(C)  This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is operated in accordance with ORC 4513.171. As used in this section, coroner's vehicle means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell capable of giving an audible signal. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or Section 331.211, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 4511.45) 
Sec. 331.211. - Report of vehicle failing to yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle. 
(A)  When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by Section 331.21(A) impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency, any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. 
(B)  (1)  Upon receipt of a report under subsection (A) of this section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(2)  If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged violation of Section 331.21(A) is established, the law enforcement agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to the operator. 
(3)  If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates Section 331.21(A) based on a report filed under subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of Section 331.21(A) based on a report filed under subsection (A) of this section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person's right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  License plate includes any temporary license placard issued under ORC 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction. 
(2)  Public safety vehicle does not include an unmarked public safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or a vehicle used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(ORC 4511.454) 
Sec. 331.22. - Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway: duty to yield. 
(A)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley or from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.44) 
Sec. 331.23. - Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway: stopping at sidewalk. 
(A)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.431) 
Sec. 331.24. - Right-of-way of funeral procession. 
(A)  As used in this section funeral procession means two or more vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(B)  Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Section 331.21 or when directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection notwithstanding any traffic control devices or right-of-way provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian. 
(C)  No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.451) 
Sec. 331.25. - Driver's view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons. 
(A)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(B)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver' s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.70(A),(B),(D)) 
Sec. 331.26. - Driving upon street posted as closed for repair. 
(A)  No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close such street or highway. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.71) 
Sec. 331.27. - Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles. 
(A)  The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.72) 
Sec. 331.28. - Driving over fire hose. 
(A)  No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Chief or fire official in command, be driven over any unprotected fire hose that is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.73) 
Sec. 331.29. - Driving through safety zone. 
(A)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.60) 
Sec. 331.30. - One-way streets and rotary traffic islands. 
(A)  Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the rotary traffic island. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.32) 
Sec. 331.31. - Driving upon divided roadways. 
(A)  Whenever any street has been divided into two roadways by an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or median section, except through an opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This section does not prohibit the occupancy of such dividing space, barrier or median section for the purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an order of a police officer. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.35) 
Sec. 331.32. - Entering and exiting controlled-access highway. 
(A)  No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 331.33. - Obstructing intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing. 
(A)  No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.712) 
Sec. 331.34. - Failure to control; weaving; full time and attention. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such vehicle. 
(B)  No person shall operate a vehicle in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(C)  No person shall operate a vehicle without giving his full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 331.35. - Occupying a moving trailer or manufactured or mobile home. 
(A)  No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.701) 
Sec. 331.36. - Squealing tires, "peeling," cracking exhaust noises. 
(A)  No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly called "peeling". 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 331.37. - Driving upon sidewalks, street lawns or curbs. 
(A)  No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(ORC 4511.711) 
(B)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the curb of a street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.711) 
Sec. 331.38. - Stopping for school bus; discharging children. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to proceed. 
It is no defense to a charge under this subsection (A) hereof that the school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign as required by subsection (B) hereof. 
(B)  Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of ORC 4511.771, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are boarding or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board. 
(C)  Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with subsection (A) hereof. 
(D)  School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway. 
(E)  No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a place of safety on the child or person's residence side of the road. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Head start agency has the same meaning as in ORC 3301.32. 
(2)  School bus , as used in relation to children who attend a program offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and displays the markings described in ORC 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of ORC 4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus has fifteen or more children aboard at any time. School bus does not include a van owned and operated by a head start agency, irrespective of its color, lights, or markings. 
(G)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section may be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is issued a citation for a violation of subsection (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge. 
(2)  In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (a)(7) of ORC 4510.02. When a license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action. 
(ORC 4511.75) 
Sec. 331.39. - Driving across grade crossing. 
(A)  (1)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within fifty feet, but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, if any of the following circumstances exist at the crossing: 
(a)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train. 
(b)  A crossing gate is lowered. 
(c)  A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train. 
(d)  There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(e)  An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing. 
(f)  There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate the crossing. 
(2)  A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (f) of this section exist at the crossing. 
(B)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4511.62) 
Sec. 331.40. - Stopping at grade crossing. 
(A)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) hereof, the operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to be placarded under 49 CFR Parts 100-185, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and, while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(2)  This section does not apply at grade crossings when the Ohio Public Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in this subsection. 
(a)  Any local authority may file an application with the Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing. Upon receipt of such a request, the Commission shall authorize a limited period for the filing of comments by any party regarding the application and then shall conduct a public hearing in the community seeking the exempt crossing designation. The Commission shall provide appropriate prior public notice of the comment period and the public hearing. By registered mail, the Commission shall notify each railroad operating over the crossing of the comment period. 
(b)  After considering any comments or other information received, the Commission may approve or reject the application. By order, the Commission may establish conditions for the exempt crossing designation, including compliance with division (b) of 49 C.F.R. Part 392.10, when applicable. An exempt crossing designation becomes effective only when appropriate signs giving notice of the exempt designation are erected at the crossing as ordered by the Commission and any other conditions ordered by the Commission are satisfied. 
(c)  By order, the Commission may rescind any exempt crossing designation made under this section if the Commission finds that a condition at the exempt crossing has changed to such an extent that the continuation of the exempt crossing designation compromises public safety. The Commission may conduct a public hearing to investigate and determine whether to rescind the exempt crossing designation. If the Commission rescinds the designation, it shall order the removal of any exempt crossing signs and may make any other necessary order. 
(3)  As used in this section: 
(a)  School vehicle means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school. 
(b)  Bus means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver, or carries sixteen or more passengers, including the driver. 
(c)  Exempt crossing means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under subsection (A)(2) hereof at which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (A)(4), whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of subsection (A) hereof or ORC 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those sections, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4511.63) 
(B)  (1)  When authorized stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within fifty but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this subsection (B)(1) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.61) 
Sec. 331.41. - Shortcutting; avoiding traffic control devices. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property marked with signs "No Through Traffic" or words of similar import for the purpose of passing from one roadway to another. 
(B)  No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property for the purpose of avoiding compliance with a traffic control device. 
(C)  It shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section for the operator of a vehicle to cross public or private property as provided herein without using the service of such property, stopping the engine or both. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 331.42. - Littering from motor vehicle. 
(A)  No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements. 
(B)  No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements. 
(C)  As used in this section, litter means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.82) 
Sec. 331.43. - Wearing earplugs or earphones prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, earphones means any headset, radio, tape player or other similar device that provides the listener with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. Earphones does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into protective headgear. 
(B)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Any person wearing a hearing aid; 
(2)  Law enforcement personnel while on duty; 
(3)  Fire personnel and emergency medical service personnel while on duty; 
(4)  Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the maintenance or repair of any street or highway; or 
(5)  Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.84) 
Sec. 331.44. - Vehicular operation on street closed due to rise in water level. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(B)  A person who is issued a citation for a violation of subsection (A) hereof is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in court, but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under Section 501.99 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A) hereof shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any such rescurer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If more than one rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under division (B) of ORC 2929.28, a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in ORC 2929.28. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical service organization , firefighting agency and private fire company have the same meanings as in ORC 9.60. 
(2)  Rescuer means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting service, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization. 
(ORC 4511.714.) 
CHAPTER 333. - OVI; WILLFUL MISCONDUCT; SPEED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Failure to control vehicle,  331.34; walking on highway while under the influence,  371.09. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; drug of abuse defined, ORC 3719.011(A); alcohol defined, ORC 4301.01(B)(1); alteration of prima-facie speed limits, ORC 4511.21, 4511.22(B), 4511.23. 

Sec. 333.01. - Driving or physical control while under the influence. 
(A)  (1)  Operation Generally. No person shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply: 
(a)  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
(b)  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one per cent or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
(c)  The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths of one per cent or more but less than two hundred four-thousandths of one per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(d)  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one gram or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's breath. 
(e)  The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one gram or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person's urine. 
(f)  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one per cent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
(g)  The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths of one per cent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(h)  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's breath. 
(i)  The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person's urine. 
(j)  Except as provided in subsection (M) of this section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following: 
i.  The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's urine of at least five hundred nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
ii.  The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person's urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
iii.  The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
iv.  The person has a concentration of heroin in the person's urine of at least two thousand nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
v.  The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
vi.  The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
vii.  The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
viii.  Either of the following applies: 
a.  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at least fifteen nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
b.  The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at least thirty-five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
ix.  The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's urine of at least five hundred nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
x.  The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
xi.  The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to ORC 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person's urine, in a person's whole blood, or in a person's blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this Municipality, the rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person's urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(2)  No person who, within twenty years of the conduct described in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of ORC 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following: 
(a)  Operate any vehicle within this Municipality while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them; 
(b)  Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as described in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under ORC 4511.191, and being advised by the officer in accordance with ORC 4511.192 of the consequences of the person's refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests. 
(B)  Operation After Under-Age Consumption. No person under twenty-one years of age shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one per cent but less than eight-hundredths of one per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
(2)  The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one per cent but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(3)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one gram but less than eight-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's breath. 
(4)  The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-thousandths of one gram but less than eleven-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person's urine. 
(C)  One Conviction Limitation. In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these subsections. 
(ORC 4511.99) 
(D)  Physical Control. 
(1)  As used in this subsection, physical control means being in the driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle's ignition key or other ignition device. 
(2)  (a)  No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply: 
i.  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
ii.  The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in subsection (A)(1)(b), (c), (d) or (e) hereof. 
iii.  Except as provided in subsection (D)(3) of this section, the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in subsection (A)(1)(j) hereof. 
(b)  No person under twenty-one years of age shall be in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or while the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in subsection (B)(1) to (4) hereof. 
(3)  Subsection (D)(2)(a)iii. of this section does not apply to a person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in subsection (A)(1)(j) hereof, if both of the following apply: 
(a)  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(b)  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(E)  Evidence; Tests. 
(1)  (a)  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of (A)(1)(a) of this section or for any equivalent offense, that is vehicle-related the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in ORC 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. 
(b)  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this subsection regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in ORC 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this section when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer under ORC 4511.191, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this subsection may refuse to withdraw blood under this subsection, if in that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. 
The bodily substance withdrawn under subsection (E)(1)(b) hereof shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to ORC 3701.143. 
(c)  As used in subsection (E)(1)(b) of this section, emergency medical technician-intermediate and emergency medical technician-paramedic have the same meanings as in ORC 4765.01. 
(2)  In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for violation of subsection (A) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in subsections (A)(1)(b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section, or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This subsection does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to that subsection. 
(3)  Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to subsection (E)(1)(b) hereof, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of ORC 4511.191, the arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. If the person was under arrest other than described in division (A)(5) of ORC 4511.191, the form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under ORC 4511.192, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person's expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  (a) As used in subsections (E)(4)(b) and (c) of this section, national highway traffic safety administration means the National Traffic Highway Safety Administration established as an administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C.A. 105. 
(b)  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (A), (B) or (D) of this section, of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or person in physical control of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply: 
i.  The officer may testify concerning the results of the field sobriety test so administered. 
ii.  The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding. 
iii.  If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under subsection (E)(4)(b)i. or ii. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate. 
(c)  Subsection (E)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that subsection, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by subsection (E)(4)(b) of this section. 
(ORC 4511.19; 4511.194) 
(F)  Forensic Laboratory Reports. 
(1)  Subject to subsection (F)(3) of this section, in any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (j) or (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those subsections, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this subsection that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in this subsection shall be admitted as prima-facie evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of the following: 
(a)  The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the analysis; 
(b)  Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found; 
(c)  A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties; 
(d)  An outline of the analyst's or test performer's education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the Department of Health. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission of evidence, a report of the type described in subsection (F)(1) of this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant. 
(3)  A report of the type described in subsection (F)(1) of this section shall not be prima-facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of justice. 
(G)  Immunity From Liability For Withdrawing Blood. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or ORC 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or ORC 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this subsection also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity provided in this subsection is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engaged in willful or wanton misconduct. 
As used in this subsection, emergency medical technician-intermediate and emergency medical technician-paramedic have the same meanings as in ORC 4765.01. 
(H)  General OVI Penalty. 
(1)  Whoever violates any provision of subsections (A)(1)(a) to (i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever violates subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for either offense under ORC Chapter 2929, and this Traffic Code, except as otherwise authorized or required by subsections (H)(1)(a) to (e) of this section: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (H)(1)(b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
i.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsections (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), or (j) of this section, a mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. As used in this subsection, three consecutive days means seventy-two consecutive hours. The court may sentence an offender to both an intervention program and a jail term. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the three-day mandatory jail term or intervention program. However, in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months. 
The court may suspend the execution of the three-day jail term under this subsection if the court, in lieu of that suspended term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program certified under ORC 5119.38. 
The court also may suspend the execution of any part of the three-day jail term under this subsection if it places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.25 for part of the three days, requires the offender to attend for the suspended part of the term a drivers' intervention program so certified, and sentences the offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days that the offender does not spend attending the program. The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control and in addition to the required attendance at a drivers' intervention program, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to ORC Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose on the offender any other conditions of community control that it considers necessary. 
If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time offender under ORC 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by the court under subsection (H)(1)(a)i. of this section for the offense apply, except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term imposed by the court under subsection (H)(1)(a)i. of this section upon granting unlimited driving privileges in accordance with ORC 4510.022. 
ii.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i) or (A)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of at least three consecutive days and a requirement that the offender attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program that is certified pursuant to ORC 5119.38. As used in this subsection, three consecutive days means seventy-two consecutive hours. If the court determines that the offender is not conducive to treatment in a drivers' intervention program, if the offender refuses to attend a drivers' intervention program, or if the jail at which the offender is to serve the jail term imposed can provide a drivers' intervention program, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term of at least six consecutive days. 
If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time offender under ORC 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by the court under subsection (H)(1)(a)ii. of this section for the offense apply, except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term imposed by the court under subsection (H)(1)(a)ii. of this section upon granting unlimited driving privileges in accordance with ORC 4510.022. 
The court may require the offender, under a community control sanction imposed under ORC 2929.25, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to ORC Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services, in addition to the required attendance at drivers' intervention program, that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of community control on the offender that it considers necessary. 
iii.  In all cases, a fine of not less than three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) and not more than one thousand seventy-five dollars ($1,075.00). 
iv.  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of one to three years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under ORC 4510.022. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (H)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
i.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), or (j) of this section, a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. The court shall impose the ten-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the ten-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by ORC 5119.21, subject to subsection (K) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
ii.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i) or (A)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of twenty consecutive days. The court shall impose the twenty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the twenty-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by ORC 5119.21, subject to subsection (K) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
iii.  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section 303.99, a fine of not less than five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) and not more than one thousand six hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,625.00). 
iv.  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of one to seven years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(ORC 4511.19) 
v.  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for ninety days in accordance with ORC 4503.233 and impoundment of the license plates of that vehicle for ninety days. 
(ORC 4511.193) 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (H)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
i.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), or (j) of this section, a mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days. The court shall impose the thirty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the thirty-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the jail terms set forth in Section 303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year. 
ii.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i) or (A)(2) of this section, a mandatory jail term of sixty consecutive days. The court shall impose the sixty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the sixty-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in Section 303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year. 
iii.  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section 303.99, a fine of not less than eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) and not more than two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00). 
iv.  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of two to twelve years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(ORC 4511.19) 
v.  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense in accordance with ORC 4503.234. Subsection (H)(5) of this section applies regarding any vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under this subsection. 
(ORC 4511.193) 
vi.  In all cases, the court shall order the offender to participate with a community addiction services provider authorized by ORC 5119.21, subject to subsection (K) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The operator of the services provider shall determine and assess the degree of the offender's alcohol dependency and shall make recommendations for treatment. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (H)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or four violations of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within twenty years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony of the fourth degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(e)  An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of ORC 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a felony of the third degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in division (F)(2) of ORC 4511.191. 
(3)  If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under subsection (H)(1)(b)i. or ii. or (H)(1)(c)i. or ii. of this section and if, within sixty days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence under this subsection that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days required by subsection (H)(1)(b)i. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to five consecutive days in jail and not less than eighteen consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the five consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed six months. The five consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of twenty consecutive days required by subsection (H)(1)(b)ii. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to ten consecutive days in jail and not less than thirty-six consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the ten consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring shall not exceed six months. The ten consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days required by subsection (H)(1)(c)i. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to fifteen consecutive days in jail and not less than fifty-five consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the fifteen consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring shall not exceed one year. The fifteen consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of sixty consecutive days required by subsection (H)(1)(c)ii. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to thirty consecutive days in jail and not less than one hundred ten consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the thirty consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed one year. The thirty consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
(4)  If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under subsection (H) of this section and if ORC 4510.13 permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires that the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under ORC 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in division (B) of ORC 4503.231. 
(5)  If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under this section is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of ORC 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national auto dealers association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section. 
(6)  In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under subsection (H) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under subsection (H) of this section. 
(7)  A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests administered to the offender if all of the following apply: 
(a)  The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A) of this section. 
(b)  The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine. 
(c)  The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the time of the offense. 
(8)  As used in subsection (H) of this section, electronic monitoring , mandatory prison term and mandatory term of local incarceration have the same meanings as in ORC 2929.01. 
(I)  Vehicle Operation After Underage Alcohol Consumption Penalty. Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (I)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6) of ORC 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under ORC 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under ORC 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under subsection (I)(1) of this section as required under that section. 
(2)  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of ORC 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(3)  If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in ORC 2941.1416 and if the court imposes a jail term for the violation of subsection (B) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant to division (E) of ORC 2929.24. 
(4)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28, in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the violation of subsection (B) of this section. 
(ORC 4511.19) 
(J)  Physical Control Penalty. Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02. 
(ORC 4511.194) 
(K)  Compliance With ORC Chapter 5119 Standards. 
(1)  No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under ORC Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services. 
(2)  An offender who stays in a driver's intervention program or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's indigent drivers' alcohol treatment fund. 
(L)  Appeal Does Not Stay Operation of License Suspension. If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension. 
(M)  Subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that subsection, if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(2)  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(N)  The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of ORC 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited concentration of alcohol. 
(O)  Conflict of Terms. All terms defined in ORC 4510.01 apply to this section. If the meaning of a term defined in OCR 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the same term as defined in ORC 4501.01 or this Traffic Code, the term as defined in ORC 4510.01 applies to this section. 
(ORC 4511.19) 
(P)  Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (A) hereof shall be deposited into the municipal or county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund pursuant to ORC 4511.193. 
(ORC 4511.193) 
(Q)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Equivalent offense means any of the following: 
(a)  A violation of division (A) or (B) of ORC 4511.19; 
(b)  A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance; 
(c)  A violation of ORC 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section; 
(d)  A violation of division (A)(1) of ORC 2903.06 or 2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions; 
(e)  A violation of division (A)(2), (3) or (4) of ORC 2903.06, division (A)(2) of ORC 2903.08, or former ORC 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them; 
(f)  A violation of division (A) or (B) of ORC 1547.11; 
(g)  A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this State while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this State with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine; 
(h)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of ORC 4511.19 or division (A) or (B) or ORC 1547.11; 
(i)  A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of ORC 4511.19 or division (A) or (B) of ORC 1547.11; 
(2)  Mandatory jail term means the mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten, twenty, thirty, or sixty days that must be imposed under subsection (H)(1)(a), (b) or (c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (A) hereof and in relation to which all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term must be served in a jail. 
(b)  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(3)  Municipal OVI ordinance and municipal OVI offense mean any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum, or plasma, breath or urine. 
(4)  Community residential sanction , continuous alcohol monitoring , jail , mandatory prison term , mandatory term of local incarceration , sanction and prison term have the same meanings as in ORC 2929.01. 
(5)  Drug of abuse has the same meaning as in ORC 4506.01. 
(6)  Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related means an equivalent offense that is any of the following: 
(a)  A violation described in subsection (Q)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) hereof; 
(b)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of ORC 4511.19; 
(c)  A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of ORC 4511.19. 
(ORC 4511.181) 
Sec. 333.02. - Operation in willful or wanton disregard of safety. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property. 
(ORC 4511.20) 
(B)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property other than streets or highways, in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property. 
This subsection does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such operation thereon. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.201) 
(D)  Whenever a person is found guilty under this section of operating a motor vehicle in violation of this section relating to reckless operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of ORC 4510.02. 
(ORC 4510.15) 
Sec. 333.03. - Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed than will permit the persons to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(B)  It is prima-facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or established pursuant to ORC 4511.21 by the Ohio Director of Transportation or Council, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following: 
(1)  (a)  Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing hours, and when twenty miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected; except, that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by subsection (B)(4) hereof and on freeways, if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by subsection (B)(7) hereof. The end of every school zone may be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect. 
(b)  As used in this section, school means any school chartered under ORC 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with Rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for nonchartered, non-tax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. 
(c)  As used in this section, school zone means that portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or highway. The Ohio Director of Transportation or Director of Administration and/or Council may extend the traditional school zone boundaries for streets and highways under the City's jurisdiction. The distances in subsections (B)(1)(c)i. to iii. hereof shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or combinations thereof the Ohio Director of Transportation or the Director of Administration and/or Council approves as most appropriate: 
i.  The distance encompassed by projecting the school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction; 
ii.  The distance encompassed by projecting the school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction; 
iii.  The distance encompassed by the special marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of highway; 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in subsections (B)(1)(a) and (c) hereof. 
(d)  As used in this subsection, crosswalk has the meaning given that term in Section 301.09. The Director may, upon request by resolution of Council, and upon submission by the Municipality of such engineering, traffic and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a State route lying within the Municipality that includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of the crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet on each approach direction of the State route; 
(2)  Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the Municipality, except on State routes outside business districts, through highways outside business districts and alleys; 
(3)  Thirty-five miles per hour on all State routes or through highways within the Municipality outside business districts, except as provided in subsections (B)(4) and (5) hereof; 
(4)  Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways within the Municipality; 
(5)  Fifty miles per hour on State routes within the Municipality outside urban districts unless a lower prima-facie speed is established as further provided in this section; 
(6)  Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the Municipality; 
(7)  Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved shoulders inside the Municipality other than freeways as provided in subsection (B)(10) and (12); 
(8)  Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of rural divided highways; 
(9)  Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on rural expressways without traffic control signals; 
(10)  Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all rural freeways. 
(11)  Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt; 
(12)  Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an interstate freeway outerbelt; 
(C)  It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in subsection (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or any declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in subsection (D) hereof. No person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit. 
(D)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as follows: 
(1)  At a speed exceeding fifty-five miles per hour, except upon a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in subsection (B)(8), (9), (10) and (12) hereof; 
(2)  At a speed exceeding sixty miles per hour upon a highway as provided in subsection (B)(8) hereof; 
(3)  At a speed exceeding sixty-five miles per hour upon an expressway as provided in subsection (B)(9) hereof, except upon a freeway as provided in subsection (B)(10) hereof; 
(4)  At a speed exceeding seventy miles per hour upon a freeway as provided in subsection (B)(10) hereof; 
(5)  At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a speed limit pursuant to ORC 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2). 
(E)  In every charge of violation of this section the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance upon subsection (C) hereof also the speed which subsections (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section declares is prima-facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven. 
(F)  When a speed in excess of both a prima-facie limitation and a limitation in subsection (D) hereof is alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation indicated of both subsections (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in subsection (D) hereof. If the court finds a violation of subsection (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction under such subsection and dismiss the charge under subsection (D) hereof. If it finds no violation of subsections (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under subsection (D) hereof. 
(G)  Points shall be assessed for violation of a limitation under subsection (D) hereof in accordance with ORC 4510.036. 
(H)  Whenever, in accordance with ORC 4511.21 or this section, the speed limitations as established herein have been altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs. 
(I)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Interstate system has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C.A. 101. 
(2)  Commercial bus means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
(3)  Noncommercial bus includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization. 
(4)  Outerbelt means a portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director. 
(5)  Rural means outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with 23 USC 101, and outside of a business or urban district. 
(J)  (1)  A violation of any provision of this section is one of the following: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (J)(1)(b), (1)(c), (2) and (3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor; 
(b)  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this section or of any provision of ORC 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; 
(c)  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any provision of this section or of any provision of ORC 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of any provision of ORC 4511.21 or of any provision of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to ORC 4511.21 and operated a motor vehicle faster than thirty-five miles an hour in a business district of a municipal corporation, faster than fifty miles an hour in other portions of a municipal corporation, or faster than thirty-five miles an hour in a school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (J)(1) of this section, if the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in accordance with ORC 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this subsection and if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to pay the fine. 
(ORC 4511.21) 
(Ord. 40-07. Passed 8-9-2007.) 
Sec. 333.031. - Approaching a stationary public safety, emergency or road service vehicle. 
(A)  The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with ORC 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Section 337.16, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a street or highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due caution and, if possible with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with ORC 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle. 
(2)  If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of a type described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic conditions. 
(B)  This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with ORC 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(C)  No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by subsection (A) of this section. 
(d)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection 303.99(b), upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 
(ORC 4511.213) 
Sec. 333.04. - Stopping vehicle; slow speed; posted minimum speeds. 
(A)  No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with law. 
(B)  Whenever, in accordance with ORC 4511.22(B), the minimum speed limit of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway has been declared and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set forth on such signs. No person shall operate a motor vehicle below the speed limits posted upon such signs except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(C)  In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.22) 
Sec. 333.05. - Speed limitations over bridges. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street at a speed which is greater then the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is posted with authorized signs stating such maximum speed. Such signs shall be erected and maintained at a distance of at least 100 feet before each end of such structure. 
(B)  Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section, proof of the determination of the maximum speed and the existence of such signs shall constitute prima-facie evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.23) 
Sec. 333.06. - Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles. 
The prima-facie speed limitations set forth in Section 333.03 do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
(ORC 4511.24) 
Sec. 333.07. - Street racing prohibited. 
(A)  As used in this section, street racing means the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. 
Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful speeds established by Section 333.03 or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing. 
(B)  No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road, street or highway in this Municipality. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege for not less than thirty days or more than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this subsection. 
(ORC 4511.251) 
Sec. 333.08. - Operation without reasonable control. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle, agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.202) 
Sec. 333.09. - Reckless operation on streets, public or private property. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway without due regard for the safety of persons or property. 
(B)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property other than streets or highways, without due regard for the safety of persons or property. 
This subsection does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such operation thereon. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 333.10. - Operation in violation of immobilization order. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization order issued under ORC 4503.233. 
(B)  A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of subsection (A) hereof shall be criminally forfeited in accordance with the procedures contained in ORC 4503.234. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 4503.236) 
Sec. 333.11. - Texting while driving prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based communication. 
(B)  Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the person's duties; 
(3)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is outside a lane of travel; 
(4)  A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call; 
(5)  A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information, including emergency, traffic or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the motor vehicle; 
(6)  A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves; 
(7)  A person using a device for navigation purposes; 
(8)  A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device or a feature or function of the device; 
(9)  A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data; 
(10)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or function of the vehicle. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (A) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed. 
(D)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(E)  A prosecution for a violation of ORC 4511.204 does not preclude a prosecution for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of ORC 4511.204 and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under ORC 2941.25. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Electronic wireless communications device includes any of the following: 
(a)  A wireless telephone; 
(b)  A text-messaging device; 
(c)  A personal digital assistant; 
(d)  A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; 
(e)  Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed or used to communicate text. 
(2)  Voice-operated or hands-free device means a device that allows the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication without the use of either hand except to activate, or deactivate a feature or function. 
(3)  Write, send or read a text-based communication means to manually write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless communications device, including manually writing or sending, or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic mail. 
(ORC 4511.204) 
CHAPTER 335. - LICENSING; ACCIDENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Glass removal from street after accident,  311.01. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; deposit of driver's license as bond, ORC 2937.221; motor vehicle licensing law, ORC Ch. 4503; driver's license law, ORC Ch. 4507; power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain violations, ORC Ch. 4510; state point system suspension, ORC 4510.03.6; state accident reports, ORC 4509.01(J), 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11; motorized bicycle operator's license, ORC 4511.521. 

Sec. 335.01. - Driver's license or commercial driver's license required. 
(A)  (1)  No person, except those expressly exempted under ORC 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4507 or a commercial driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4506. 
(2)  No person, except a person expressly exempted under ORC 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under ORC Chapter 4507. The license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted license as provided in ORC 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver's or commercial driver's license at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial driver's license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state or any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial driver's license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of ORC 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license bearing the motorcycle endorsement or the offender's restricted license was expired at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender's last violation of ORC 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. 
(E)  If the offender is sentenced under subsection (C)(2) hereof, if within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of ORC 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender's license was expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02. 
(ORC 4510.12) 
Sec. 335.02. - Permitting operation without valid license; one license permitted. 
(A)  No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking knowing the operator does not have a valid driver's license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under ORC Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4506. 
(B)  No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until he surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to him by another jurisdiction recognized by the State of Ohio. No person shall be permitted to have more than one valid license at any time. 
(ORC 4507.02) 
(C)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4507.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4507.02; 4507.99) 
Sec. 335.021. - Ohio driver's license required for in state residents. 
(A)  Any person who becomes a resident of this State, within thirty days of becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver's license issued by another state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a Deputy Registrar. If such a person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall apply for a driver's license in this State. If the person fails to apply for a driver's license within thirty days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this Municipality under a license issued by another state. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  The offense established under subsection (B)(1) of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state for purposes of ORC 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense. 
(C)  For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, resident means any person to whom any of the following applies: 
(1)  The person maintains their principal residence in this State and does not reside in this State as a result of the person's active service in the United States Armed Forces. 
(2)  The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under ORC 4507.01. 
(ORC 4507.213) 
Sec. 335.03. - Driving with temporary instruction permit; curfew. 
(A)  No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under ORC 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in violation of the following conditions: 
(1)  If the permit is issued to a person who is at least fifteen years six months of age, but less than sixteen years of age: 
(a)  The permit and identification card are in the holder's immediate possession; 
(b)  The holder is accompanied by an eligible adult who actually occupies the seat beside the permit holder and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in ORC 4511.19(A); 
(c)  The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(2)  If the permit is issued to a person who is at least sixteen years of age: 
(a)  The permit and identification card are in the holder's immediate possession; 
(b)  The holder is accompanied by a licensed operator who is at least twenty-one years of age and is actually occupying a seat beside the driver and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in ORC 4511.19(A); 
(c)  The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(B)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, no holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under ORC 4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of eighteen years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and six a.m. 
The holder of a permit issued under ORC 4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and six a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this State and is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Section 333.01(A). 
(C)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Eligible adult means any of the following: 
(a)  An instructor of a driver education course approved by the Department of Education or a driver training course approved by the Department of Public Safety; 
(b)  Any of the following persons who holds a current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this State: 
i.  A parent, guardian or custodian of the permit holder; 
ii.  A person twenty-one years of age or older who acts in loco parentis of the permit holder. 
(2)  Occupant restraining device has the same meaning as in ORC 4513.263. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4507.05) 
Sec. 335.031. - Driving with probationary license; curfew. 
(A)  (1)  Driving with probationary license. 
(a)  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and six a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian. 
(b)  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for twelve months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian. 
(2)  (a)  Subject to subsection (C)(1) of this section, subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver's license who is doing either of the following: 
i.  Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and six a.m. provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer. 
ii.  Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and six a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school; 
iii.  Traveling to or from an official religious event between the hours of midnight and six a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official affiliated with the event. 
(b)  Subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver's license who is doing either of the following: 
i.  Traveling to or from work between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer. 
ii.  Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school; 
iii.  Traveling to or from an official religious event between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official affiliated with the event. 
(3)  An employer, school official or official affiliated with a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver's license with the written documentation described in subsection (A)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and holders of probationary driver's licenses may utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that subsection. 
(4)  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by the probationary license holder's parent, guardian or custodian. 
(B)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or (b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or (b) of this section; or the holder was an emancipated minor. 
(C)  (1)  If a person is issued a probationary driver's license prior to attaining the age of seventeen years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is issued the probationary driver's license, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder attains the age of seventeen years, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established under subsection (C)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court under that subsection. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division. 
(3)  No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(D)  No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(E)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as required by subsection (D) hereof, or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons if the requirement in that subsection has been or is being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that requirement. 
(F)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or (b) hereof has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for such violation. 
(G)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Occupant restraining device has the same meaning as in ORC 4513.263. 
(2)  Family member of a probationary license holder includes any of the following: 
(a)  A spouse; 
(b)  A child or stepchild; 
(c)  A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law; 
(d)  An aunt or uncle; 
(e)  A sibling, whether or the whole or half blood or by adoption, a brother-in-law or a sister-in-law; 
(f)  A son or daughter of the probationary license holder's stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder; 
(g)  An eligible adult, as defined in ORC 4507.05. 
(3)  Moving violation means any violation of any statute or ordinance that regulates the operation of vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys on the highways or streets. Moving violation does not include a violation of ORC 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration. 
(H)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4507.071) 
Sec. 335.032. - Use of electronic wireless communication device prohibited while driving. 
(A)  No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the age of eighteen years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an electronic wireless communications device. 
(B)  Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to either of the following: 
(1)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a lane of travel; 
(3)  A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving. 
(C)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of sixty days. 
(2)  If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates this section shall be fined three hundred dollars ($300.00). In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person's driver's license or permit for a definite period of one year. 
(D)  The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of ORC 4511.205 does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of ORC 4511.205 and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under ORC 2941.25. 
(E)  As used in this section, electronic wireless communications device includes any of the following: 
(1)  A wireless telephone; 
(2)  A personal digital assistant; 
(3)  A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; 
(4)  A text-messaging device; 
(5)  Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word. 
(ORC 4511.205) 
Sec. 335.04. - Certain acts prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or altered; 
(2)  Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; 
(3)  Display or represent as one's own, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the person so displaying the same; 
(4)  Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled; 
(5)  In any application for an identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, tem porary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact, or present any physician's statement required under ORC 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or fictitious. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4507.30) 
Sec. 335.05. - Wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle. 
(A)  No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges. 
(2)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under ORC Chapter 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or this Traffic Code. 
(3)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition contained in ORC Chapter 4509. 
(4)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving would violate ORC 4511.19 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. 
(5)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under ORC 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under that order. 
(B)  Without lim iting or precluding the cons ideration of any other evidence in determining whether a violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a category described in subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section if any of the following applies: 
(1)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (A)(1), (3) or (5) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or affinity. 
(2)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's license, permit or privilege. 
(3)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle and shall be punished as provided in subsections (C) to (H) of this section. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02. 
(2)  (a)  If, within three years of a violation of subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of ORC 4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(4) or (5) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties imposed under Section 303.99, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02, and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3)(b) or (c) of this section, the court may order, for thirty days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.233. 
(b)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of ORC 4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for sixty days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.233. 
(c)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.234. 
If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this subsection is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of ORC 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national automobile dealer's association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this subsection shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of ORC 4503.234. 
(D)  If a court orders the immobilization of a vehicle under subsection (C) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(E)  If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under subsection (C) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the registration of the vehicle. 
(F)  This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in ORC 4549.65. 
(G)  Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section or a substantially similar municipal ordinance shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle. 
(H)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the person's name. 
(ORC 4511.203) 
Sec. 335.06. - Display of license. 
(A)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is properly made and the operator has the operator's driver's license on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed under ORC Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima-facie evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) hereof, whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4507.35 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4507.35) 
Sec. 335.07. - Driving under suspension or license restriction. 
(A)  Except as provided under subsection (B) hereof and Sections 335.072 and 335.074, no person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than ORC Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the person's license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this Municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving privileges. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality in violation of any restriction of the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit imposed under division (D) of ORC 4506.10 or under ORC 4507.14. 
(C)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) of this section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02. 
(2)  (a)  Except as provided in subsection (D)(2)(b) or (c) of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of ORC 4510.11 or ORC 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for thirty days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for thirty days in accordance with ORC 4503.233. 
(b)  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of ORC 4510.11 or any combination of two violations of ORC 4510.11 or ORC 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for sixty days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for sixty days in accordance with ORC 4503.233. 
(c)  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of ORC 4510.11, or any combination of three or more violations of ORC 4501.11 or ORC 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the State. 
(E)  Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(F)  Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from the court, neither the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of the offense that lead to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. The Registrar shall then take necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle. 
(G)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
(ORC 4510.11) 
(H)  Any person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under this section and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this subsection. 
(ORC 4510.037) 
Sec. 335.071. - Driving under OVI suspension. 
(A)  No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under ORC 4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under ORC 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of the suspension. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under ORC Chapter 2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(2) or (3) of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to subsection (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than thirty consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic monitoring imposed under this subsection shall not exceed six months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this subsection, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months. 
(b)  A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under subsection (E) of this section. 
(2)  If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in ORC Chapter 2929, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to subsection (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than ninety consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the fines provided for in ORC Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under subsection (E) of this section. 
(3)  If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in ORC Chapter 2929, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the fines set forth in ORC Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under subsection (E) of this section. 
(C)  No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest with electronic monitoring under subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section unless, within sixty days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the date of sentencing. 
An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that period. 
(D)  Fifty per cent of any fine imposed by a court under subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund or municipal indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that court, as created by the county or municipal corporation pursuant to division (H) of ORC 4511.191. 
(E)  In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02. 
When permitted as specified in ORC 4510.021, if the court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under ORC 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in division (B) of that section. 
A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under ORC 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a commercial driver's license under ORC 4506.16 shall be issued a driver's license under ORC Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be issued a driver's license under ORC Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension. 
(F)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced. 
(ORC 4510.14) 
(G)  (1) If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to ORC 4510.14, the court, in addition to and independent of any sentence that it imposes upon the offender for the offense, if the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, shall do whichever of the following is applicable: 
(a)  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of ORC 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of ORC 4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the immobilization for thirty days of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for thirty days of the license plates of that vehicle in accordance with ORC 4503.233. 
(b)  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of ORC 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of ORC 4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the immobilization for sixty days of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for sixty days of the license plates of that vehicle in accordance with ORC 4503.233. 
(c)  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of ORC 4507.02 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the criminal forfeiture to the State of the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense. 
(2)  An order for immobilization and impoundment of a vehicle under this section shall be issued and enforced in accordance with ORC 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(3)  An order for criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under this section shall be issued and enforced under ORC 4503.234. Upon receipt of a copy of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a Deputy Registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take the necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle. 
(ORC 4510.161) 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Electronic monitoring has the same meaning as in ORC 2929.01. 
(2)  Equivalent offense means any of the following: 
(a)  A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to subsection (A) of this section; 
(b)  A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially equivalent to subsection (A) of this section. 
(3)  Jail has the same meaning as in ORC 2929.01. 
(4)  Mandatory jail term means the mandatory term in jail of three, ten, or thirty consecutive days that must be imposed under subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (A) of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term must be served in a jail. 
(b)  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(ORC 4510.14) 
Sec. 335.072. - Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension. 
(A)  No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or canceled pursuant to ORC Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by ORC Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period in which the person is required by ORC 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of ORC 4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality if the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended pursuant to ORC 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a judgment. 
(C)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(D)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be punished as provided in subsection (D) hereof. Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (D) hereof. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of ORC 4510.16, or any combination of two violations of ORC 4510.16 or ORC 4510.11 or 4510.111, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
(ORC 4510.16) 
(E)  No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of financial responsibility in accordance with ORC 4509.101 shall produce any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial responsibility made in accordance with ORC 4509.101. Whoever violates this subsection (E) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4509.102) 
Sec. 335.073. - Driving without complying with license reinstatement requirements. 
(A)  No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by the person at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) hereof. The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) hereof may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a license and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of a violation of subsection (A) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of ORC 4510.21(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of ORC 4510.02. 
(ORC 4510.21) 
Sec. 335.074. - Driving under license forfeiture or child support suspension. 
(A)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license has been suspended pursuant to ORC 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22 or 4510.33. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (C) of this section. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be sentenced pursuant to ORC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to ORC 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of ORC 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of ORC 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of ORC 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of subsection (A) of ORC 4510.111, or any combination of two or more violations of subsection (A) of ORC 4510.111, or ORC 4510.11 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
(ORC 4510.111) 
Sec. 335.08. - Operation or sale without certificate of title. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle for which a certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance with ORC Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this Municipality knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas; 
(2)  Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in ORC Chapter 4505; 
(3)  Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in ORC Chapter 4505; 
(4)  Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of a court of common pleas as provided in ORC Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title; 
(5)  Violate any rules adopted pursuant to ORC Chapter 4505; 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided in ORC Chapter 4505 and Chapter 4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle the ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with ORC 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act", 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981; 
(7)  Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled. 
(B)  This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage disposition. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. 
(ORC 4505.18) 
Sec. 335.09. - Display of license plates. 
(A)  (1)  No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle a license plate that bears the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under ORC 4503.19 and 4503.191, as follows: 
(a)  A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer or semitrailer shall display a license plate on the rear only. 
(b)  A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. 
(c)  An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. 
(2)  All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility. 
(3)  No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under ORC 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility. 
(B)  A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation or summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle if the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket, citation, or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense. 
(C)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section by failing to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor vehicle as required under subsection (A) of this section while the motor vehicle is otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A person who is subject to the penalty prescribed in subsection (C)(2) of this section is not subject to the charging of points under ORC 4510.036. 
(3)  The offense established under subsection (A) of this section is a strict liability offense and ORC 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense. 
(ORC 4503.21) 
Sec. 335.10. - Expired or unlawful license plates. 
(A)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle which is parked or operated upon the public streets or highways shall fail to annually file the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor, as required by ORC Chapter 4503. 
(ORC 4503.11) 
(B)  No person shall operate, drive or park upon the public streets or highways a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration. 
(ORC 4549.11) 
(C)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of Ohio shall operate, drive or park the motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways, while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws of Ohio relating to the registration and identification of motor vehicles. 
(ORC 4549.12) 
(D)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or highway upon which is displayed an expired license plate or an expired validation sticker. 
(E)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that were issued on an application for registration that contains any false statement by the applicant. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense. 
(3)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4549.11; 4549.12) 
Sec. 335.11. - Use of illegal license plates; transfer of registration. 
(A)  No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the streets in this Municipality if it displays a license plate or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is fictitious; 
(2)  Is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive number or identification mark; 
(3)  Belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this Municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this Municipality, during the thirty-day period described in subsection (C) hereof. 
(B)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. 
(ORC 4549.08) 
(C)  Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner shall immediately remove the license plates from the motor vehicle. The transfer of the registration and, where applicable, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they originally were issued to a succeeding motor vehicle purchased by the same person in whose name the original registration and license plates were issued shall be done within a period not to exceed thirty days. During that thirty-day period, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they originally were issued may be displayed on the succeeding motor vehicle, and the succeeding motor vehicle may be operated on the streets of the Municipality. 
(D)  Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4503.12) 
Sec. 335.111. - Registration within thirty days of residency. 
(A)  Within thirty days of becoming a resident of this State, any person who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall register the vehicle in this State. If such a person fails to register a vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this Municipality under a license issued by another state. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  The offense established under subsection (B)(1) of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state for purposes of ORC 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense. 
(C)  For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, resident means any person to whom any of the following applies: 
(1)  The person maintains their principal residence in this State and does not reside in this State as a result of the person's active service in the United States Armed Forces. 
(2)  The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under ORC 4507.01. 
(ORC 4503.111) 
Sec. 335.12. - Stopping after accident upon streets; collision with unattended vehicle. 
(A)  (1)  In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop the operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the operator has given the operator's name and address and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following: 
(a)  Any person injured in the accident or collision; 
(b)  The operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle damaged in the accident or collision; 
(c)  The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision. 
(2)  In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record the information required to be given under subsection (A)(1) of this section, the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the operator's name, address and the registered number of the motor vehicle the operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance. 
(3)  If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(3)  If the accident or collision results in the death of a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(4)  In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of ORC 4510.02. No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(ORC 4549.02) 
Sec. 335.13. - Stopping after accident upon property other than street. 
(A)  (1)  In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any other person, the operator shall give that person the operator's name and address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator's driver's or commercial driver's license. 
(2)  If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or collision does not provide the information specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the operator shall give that information, within twenty-four hours after the accident or collision, to the Police Department. 
(3)  If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required under subsection (A)(1) of this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(3)  If the accident or collision results in the death of a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(4)  In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of ORC 4510.02. No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(ORC 4549.021) 
Sec. 335.14. - Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty. 
(A)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and of the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if available, shall exhibit the driver's or commercial driver's license. 
If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident resulting in damage to the property, within twenty-four hours after the accident, shall forward to the police authority in the municipality in which the accident or collision occurred, the same information required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is known. 
(B)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(ORC 4549.03) 
CHAPTER 337. - SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Use of stop and turn signals,  331.14; wheel protectors for commercial vehicles,  339.05; vehicles transporting explosives,  339.06; towing requirements,  339.07; use of studded tires and chains,  339.11; bicycle equipment,  373.05 et seq. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, ORC 4513.28; motorized bicycle lights and equipment, ORC 4511.521; slow moving vehicle emblem, OAC Ch. 4501.13; vehicle lighting, OAC 4501-15. 

Sec. 337.01. - Driving unsafe vehicles. 
(A)  No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property. 
(B)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on vehicles do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or agricultural tractors except as made applicable to such articles of machinery. 
(ORC 4513.02) 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 337.02. - Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights. 
(A)  Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street or highway shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as required by this chapter during all of the following times: 
(1)  The time from sunset to sunrise; 
(2)  At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects on the street or highway are not discernible at a distance of one thousand feet ahead; 
(3)  At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use because of precipitation on the windshield. 
Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under ORC 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be operated upon a street or highway using only parking lights as illumination. 
(B)  Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the distance from which certain lights and devices shall render objects visible, or within which such lights or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured upon a straight level unlighted street under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated. 
(C)  Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands. 
(D)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a street or highway to stop the vehicle solely because the officer observes that a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that subsection, or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that subsection. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.03) 
Sec. 337.03. - Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of the motor vehicle. 
(B)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.04) 
Sec. 337.04. - Tail light; illumination of rear license plate. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
(B)  Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of fifty feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.05) 
Sec. 337.05. - Rear red reflectors. 
(A)  Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on a street, other than vehicles of the type mentioned in Section 337.06 or a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lights or separately, two red reflectors of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to fifty feet from such vehicle. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.06) 
Sec. 337.06. - Safety lighting on commercial vehicles. 
(A)  Buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any street, shall be equipped with clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop lights as required by State regulations. Such equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in Section 337.02 except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on a vehicle operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the street at a distance of 500 feet. 
Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically required by Section 337.02 to Section 337.15, inclusive. Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Public Utilities Commission are not subject to this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.07) 
Sec. 337.07. - Obscured lights on vehicles in combination. 
(A)  Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this section does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be lighted. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4513.08) 
Sec. 337.08. - Red light or red flag on extended loads. 
(A)  Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Section 337.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the side and rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than sixteen inches square. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.09) 
Sec. 337.09. - Lights on parked or stopped vehicles. 
(A)  Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended during the times mentioned in Section 337.02, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street. Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(ORC 4513.10) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 337.10. - Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required. 
(A)  All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles referred to in Section 337.01(C), not specifically required to be equipped with lights or other lighting devices by Section 337.02 to 337.09, shall at all times specified in Section 337.02, be equipped with at least one light displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle, and also shall be equipped with two lights displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one light displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlights. 
Lights and reflectors required or authorized by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
(B)  All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by flag person, or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation or Director of Administration and/or Council, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 305, when such construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as set forth in ORC 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less shall be operated at a speed not exceeding twenty-five miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear. The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 
As used in this subsection (B), machinery does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal. 
(C)  The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles, and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in subsection (B) hereof operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited. 
(D)  (1)  No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (B) hereof, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in subsection (B) hereof. 
(2)  No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour unless the unit displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in subsection (B) of this section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS). 
(E)  Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (B) of this section, in addition to the use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol may be equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than one thousand feet to the rear at all times specified in Section 337.02. When a double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. 
In addition to the lights described in this subsection, farm machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by Section 337.16, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section. 
(F)  Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways: 
(1)  With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with subsection (B) hereof; 
(2)  With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted under this subsection (F); 
(3)  With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective material as specified in this subsection (F). 
The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to ORC Chapter 119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this subsection (F). The rules shall permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible at all times specified in Section 337.02, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. 
(G)  Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this subsection. 
If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour and is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the agricultural tractor. 
(H)  When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour, the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate. 
(I)  As used in this section, boat trailer means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less. 
(J)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.11) 
(Ord. 40-07. Passed 8-9-2007.) 
Sec. 337.11. - Spotlight and auxiliary lights. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(B)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three State approved auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle, which when used shall conform to State regulations. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.12) 
Sec. 337.12. - Cowl, fender and back-up lights. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights or lights on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(B)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.13) 
Sec. 337.13. - Display of lighted lights. 
(A)  At all times mentioned in Section 337.02 at least two State approved lighted lights shall be displayed conforming to State regulations, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(ORC 4513.14) 
(B)  However, on a motorcycle, there shall be displayed at least one and not more than two lighted lights as required herein. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.14) 
Sec. 337.14. - Use of headlight beams. 
(A)  Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in Section 337.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, except that upon approaching an oncoming vehicle, the lights or beams shall be so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.15) 
Sec. 337.15. - Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in Section 337.02 when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing persons and substantial objects seventy-five feet ahead in lieu of lights required in Section 337.13, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of twenty miles per hour. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.16) 
Sec. 337.16. - Number of lights; limitations on flashing, oscillating or rotating lights. 
(A)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights also is equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway. 
(B)  Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five feet from the vehicle. 
(C)  (1)  Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing. This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles transporting preschool children as provided in ORC 4513.182, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by Section 337.10 to have a flashing red light. 
(2)  When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in subsection (C)(1) hereof does not apply to such machinery or vehicles. Farm machinery also may display the lights described in Section 337.10. 
(D)  Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in Section 301.27, or a school bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or Municipality, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light. 
(E)  This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights either on farm machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery, when used on a street or highway. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.17) 
Sec. 337.17. - Focus and aim of headlights. 
(A)  No person shall use any lights mentioned in Section 337.02 to 337.16, inclusive, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless the lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with State regulations. 
(B)  The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp color requirements contained in federal motor vehicle safety standard number 108, 49 C.F.R. 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation of this subsection. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.19) 
Sec. 337.18. - Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes. 
(A)  The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(2)  Every motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot. 
(3)  Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under ORC 4511.521. 
(4)  When operated upon the streets or highways of this Municipality, the following vehicles shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of two thousand pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942; 
(b)  Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of two thousand pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001. 
(5)  Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of three thousand pounds or more that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels. 
(6)  In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be employed. 
(7)  Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other sources of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. 
(8)  The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes. 
(9)  Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all conditions of loading of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances: 
From a speed of 20 miles per hour Stopping distance in feet Deceleration in feet per second per second Brakes on all wheels 30 14 Brakes not on all four wheels 40 10.7  
(10)  All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
(ORC 4513.20) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 337.19. - Horn, siren and theft alarm signal. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
(B)  No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency or public safety vehicle shall be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver of the emergency or public safety vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(C)  No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give warning to other drivers or pedestrians. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.21) 
Sec. 337.20. - Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates. 
(B)  No person shall own, operate or have in the person's possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any other way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal operation. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.22) 
Sec. 337.21. - Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the street to the rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles or motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles or motorcycles by mirror. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.23) 
Sec. 337.22. - Windshield and windshield wiper; sign or poster thereon. 
(A)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not equipped with a windshield. 
(B)  (1)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when in accordance with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle. 
(2)  Subsection (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the device meets both of the following: 
(a)  It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals. 
(b)  It does not conceal the vehicle identification number. 
(3)  Subsection (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the device meets both of the following: 
(a)  It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals. 
(b)  It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle's windshield wipers. 
(C)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.24) 
Sec. 337.23. - Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle. 
(A)  No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street with any load carried on such vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side. 
(ORC 4513.30) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 337.24. - Motor vehicle stop lights. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles. 
When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under ORC 4513.19. 
Historical motor vehicles as defined in ORC 4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.071) 
Sec. 337.25. - Air cleaner required. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine unless the carburetion system of the vehicle is protected with an air filter, a flame arresting device, or any other accepted method of protection that is adequate for this purpose. If the original device or system is replaced, it shall be replaced with one that is equal to or better than the original equipment. 
(B)  This section does not apply to a person doing automotive repair work on a motor vehicle that necessitates this device being removed while the work is performed. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 337.26. - Child restraint system usage. 
(A)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC 4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than forty pounds. 
(B)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned, leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, or day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than forty pounds. 
(C)  When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by subsection (A) or (B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under ORC 5104.011, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards. 
(D)  When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older that fifteen years of age and who is not otherwise required by subsection (A), (B) or (C) hereof to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC 4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as defined in ORC 4513.263. 
(E)  Notwithstanding-any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section has been or is being committed. 
(F)  The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary to carry out this section. 
(G)  The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a child restraint system, a booster seat or an occupant restraining device as required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section. 
(H)  This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit. 
(I)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section. 
(J)  Whoever violates subsection (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed to be a single violation of this section: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (J)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those subsections, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4511.81) 
Sec. 337.27. - Drivers and passengers required to wear seat belts. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Automobile means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the "National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966," 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C.A. 1392. 
(2)  Occupant restraining device means a seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum Federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Passenger means any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is provided. 
(4)  Commercial tractor, passenger car, and commercial car have the same meanings as provided in ORC 4501.01. 
(5)  Vehicle and motor vehicle , as used in the definitions of the terms set forth in subsection (A)(4) hereof, have the same meanings as provided in Chapter 301. 
(6)  Tort action means a civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to person or property. Tort action includes a product liability claim, as defined in ORC 2307.71 and an asbestos claim, as defined in ORC 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another agreement between persons. 
(B)  No person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted; 
(2)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in subsection (B)(3) hereof is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device; 
(3)  Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device; 
(4)  Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable form. 
(C)  Subsection (B)(3) hereof does not apply to a person who is required by Section 337.26 to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat. Subsection (B)(1) hereof does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Subsections (B)(1) and (3) hereof do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical. 
(D)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (B) hereof has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed. 
(E)  All fines collected for violations of subsection (B) hereof shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit as provided in ORC 4513.263. 
(F)  (1)  Subject to subsection (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of subsection (B)(1) or (3) or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, in violation of subsection (B)(2) of this section, shall not be considered or used by the trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence. But the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio rules of evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that represents noneconomic loss, as defined in ORC 2307.011 in a tort action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff's failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section. 
(2)  If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following: 
(a)  It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant. 
(b)  The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer, distributor or seller of the passenger car. 
(c)  The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not crashworthy. 
(G)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be fined thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (B)(3) of this section shall be fined twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates subsection (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4513.263) 
Sec. 337.28. - Use of sunscreening, nontransparent and reflectorized materials. 
(A)  Requirements. 
(1)  No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State with any sunscreening material, or other product or material which has the effect of making the windshield or windows nontransparent or would alter the windows' color, increase its reflectivity, or reduce its light transmittance, unless the product or material satisfies one of the following exceptions: 
(a)  Any manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle until such standard is subsequently repealed or reduced. In "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) manufacturer means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, including any person importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale. "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS), Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 571, can be obtained online at web site http://www.gpo.gov. 
(b)  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to the windshield when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of such window, has a light transmittance of not less than seventy per cent plus or minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in color. 
(c)  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to the side windows to the immediate right or left of the driver, so long as such material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of such windows, has a light transmittance of not less than fifty per cent plus or minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in color. 
(d)  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to a window not otherwise listed in subsections (A)(1)(a) to (c) or (e) of this section, except that outside left and right rear view mirrors are required if the sunscreening material is applied to the rear window and the sunscreening material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing material of such window, has a light tranmsmittance of less than fifty per cent plus or minus three per cent. 
(e)  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied along the top of the windshield and that does not extend downward beyond the AS-1 line or five inches from the top of the windshield, whichever is closer to the top, is not regulated by this section. 
(2)  No person shall install in any motor vehicle any glass or other material that fails to conform to the specifications of this section. 
(3)  No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined in ORC 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to the specifications of this section. 
(4)  No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window. 
(5)  No person shall operate on any highway or other public or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State that is equipped with privacy drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds unless the drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds are open and secure during vehicle operation. 
(6)  All motor vehicles, beginning with the 1990 model year, must be equipped with labels identifying sunscreening material. All sunscreening material must indicate the manufacturer's name and the percentage level of light transmission of the material permanently installed between the material and the surface to which the material is applied or affixed. Such label must be legible and must be placed in the lower left-hand corner of the vehicle window when viewed from the outside. (OAC 4501-41-03) 
(B)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A motor vehicle registered in this State in the name of a person, or the person's parent, legal guardian or spouse who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4731 or an affidavit signed by an optometrist licensed to practice in this State under ORC Chapter 4725 that states that the person has a physical condition that makes it necessary to equip such motor vehicle with sunscreening material which would be of a light transmittance and/or luminous reflectance in violation of this section. Such affidavit shall be in the possession of the person so afflicted or the driver at all times while in the motor vehicle; 
(2)  The windows to the rear of the driver in chauffeured limousines as defined herein; 
(3)  The windows to the rear of the driver in those vehicles designed and used to transport corpses which include hearses and other vehicles adapted for such use; and 
(4)  The manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle as provided in subsection (A) hereof. "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205), Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 571, can be obtained online at web site http://www.gpo.gov. (OAC 4501-41-05) 
(C)  Definitions. As used in this section, certain terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Motor vehicle has the same meaning as specified in Section 301.20. 
(2)  Sunscreening material means products or materials, including film, glazing and perforated sunscreening, which, when applied to the windshield or windows of a motor vehicle, reduce the effects of the sun with respect to light reflectance or transmittance. 
(3)  Transmittance means the ratio of the amount of total light, expressed in percentages, which is allowed to pass through the product or material, including glazing, to the amount of total light falling on the product or material and the glazing. 
(4)  Windshield means the front exterior viewing device of a motor vehicle. 
(5)  Window means any device designed for exterior viewing from a motor vehicle, except the windshield or any roof-mounted viewing device. 
(6)  Manufacturer unless otherwise specified in this section, means any person who engages in the manufacturing or assembling of sunscreening products or materials or any person who fabricates, laminates or tempers a safety glazing material, incorporating, during the manufacturing process, the capacity to reflect or reduce the transmission of light. 
(7)  Chauffeured limousine means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or fewer passengers and is operated for hire on an hourly basis pursuant to a prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and regular route. Prearranged contract means an arrangement, made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour or trip. Chauffeured limousine does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing. 
(OAC 4501-41-02) 
(D)  Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.241) 
Sec. 337.29. - Bumper heights. 
(A)  Definitions. 
(1)  Passenger car means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle. 
(2)  Multipurpose passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation. 
(3)  Truck means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less. 
(4)  Manufacturer has the same meaning as in ORC 4501.01. 
(5)  Gross vehicle weight rating means the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating established for the vehicle. 
(6)  Body floor height means the vertical distance between top of the frame rail and the bottom of the passenger compartment (cab) floor. In the event that the vehicle is a truck body, floor height will be measured by the vertical distance between the passenger compartment (cab) floor and the floor of the truck bed. 
(7)  Bumper height means the vertical distance between the ground and the highest point of the bottom of the bumper, measured when the vehicle is laden on a level surface with the vehicle tires inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure. 
(8)  Frame means the main longitudinal structural members of the chassis of the vehicle or, for vehicles with unitized body construction, the lowest main longitudinal structural members of the body of the vehicle. 
(9)  Wheel track distance means the distance on the ground between the center of the tire tread on one side of the vehicle, and the center of the tire tread on the opposite side. (OAC 4501-43-02) 
(B)  Prohibitions; Application. 
(1)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State that does not conform to the requirements of this section. 
(2)  No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this State in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system including the installation of inverted, altered or modified suspension system component parts which results in elevation of the height of the vehicle bumper or frame unit which is not in compliance with this section. 
(3)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State without a bumper on the front and rear of the vehicle if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as standard equipment by the manufacturer. 
(4)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State if the difference in height between the body floor and the top of the frame exceeds four inches. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit either of the following: 
(a)  The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State of heavy duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs as long as such equipment does not cause the vehicle to be in violation of this section; 
(b)  The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State with normal wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the control of the vehicle. 
(6)  This section does not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and similar events. 
(7)  A specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck which does not conform to this section shall not be operated on a street or highway. 
(OAC 4501-43-03) 
(C)  Specifications. 
(1)  The horizontal bumper shall be at least 4.5 inches in vertical height, centered on the vehicle's centerline, and extend no less than the width of the respective wheel track distances. Bumpers shall be horizontal load bearing bumpers and attached to the vehicle frame to effectively transfer impact when engaged. 
(2)  Maximum bumper heights shall be determined by the type of vehicle at time of manufacture. If other than a passenger vehicle, the maximum bumper height shall be determined by the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) at the time of manufacture. The height shall be measured in terms of the vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of the bumper. Maximum bumper heights are as follows: 
Front 
(inches) Rear 
(inches) Passenger Vehicles 22 22 All Other Vehicles: 4,500 lbs. and under GVWR 24 26 4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR 27 29 7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28 31  
(3)  If the body and/or truck bed height is altered the difference in height between the body floor and/or the truck bed floor to the top of the frame rail shall not exceed four inches. 
(4)  For any vehicle with bumpers or attaching components which have been modified or altered from the original manufacturer's design in order to conform with the maximum bumper requirements of this section, the bumper height shall be measured from a level surface to the bottom of the vehicle frame rail at the most forward and rearward points of the frame rail. Frame rail height if bumper modified or altered: 
Front 
(inches) Rear 
(inches) Passenger Vehicles 22 22 All Other Vehicles: 4,500 lbs. and under GVWR 24 26 4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR 27 29 7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28 31  
(5)  The height restriction in this subsection (C) applies to the distance from the ground to the bottom of the frame rail under any one or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  A motor vehicle is not equipped with a front and rear bumper. 
(b)  The bumper height relative to the frame rails has been altered. 
(c)  A supplemental bumper has been installed or an addition to the original or replacement has been made. 
(OAC 4501-43-04) 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 337.30. - Directional signals required. 
(A)  (1)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals. 
(2)  No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals. 
(B)  Directional signals means an electrical or mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear. 
(C)  All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when in use at the times mentioned in Section 337.02. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.261) 
CHAPTER 339. - COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Slower moving vehicles to be driven in right-hand lane,  331.01(B). 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; weighing vehicle; removal of excess load, ORC 4513.33; arrest notice of driver, ORC 5577.14. 

Sec. 339.01. - Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on state routes; state permit. 
(A)  No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in ORC 5577.01 to 5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in conformity with ORC 4513.01 to 4513.37, inclusive, upon any State route within the Municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or upon any local truck route. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer. 
No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or charge for movement on any State route within the Municipality; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any roadway within the Municipality which is not a State route, except as provided in Section 339.02. 
(ORC 4513.34) 
(B)  (1)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to gross load limits. 
(2)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to axle load by more than 2000 pounds per axle or group of axles. 
(3)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement officer. 
(C)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 339.02. - Use of local streets; local permit and conditions. 
(A)  No person, firm or corporation shall transport over any of the streets or alleys in the Municipality which are not State or Federal highways, in any vehicles propelled by motor or other power, any burden, including the weight of the vehicle and load, greater than 8,000 pounds, except for the purpose of making deliveries. 
(B)  Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the trucking, construction or transporting business may, upon giving satisfactory bond or security for possible damage to the satisfaction of the Director of Administration, secure a permit to drive an unloaded vehicle over such streets, even though the gross weight of such vehicle exceeds the limit set forth in subsection (A) hereof. Any person having received such permit must use the shortest route to and from State and Federal highways, and it shall be a violation of this section to use any other route. 
(C)  This section shall not apply to Municipal maintenance trucks or other vehicles belonging to the Municipality. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 785-67. Passed 11-30-1967.) 
Sec. 339.03. - Maximum width, height and length. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the Municipality, whose dimensions exceed those specified in this section. 
(B)  No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of: 
(1)  104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively within municipal corporations; 
(2)  102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other State roads with minimum pavement widths of twenty-two feet, except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the Ohio Director of Transportation; 
(3)  132 inches for traction engines; 
(4)  102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational vehicles on designated State highways or portions of highways; 
(5)  102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such State highways or portions of State highways as the Director designates. 
(C)  No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of: 
(1)  66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to ORC 306.30 to 306.54; 
(2)  45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles; 
(3)  53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may, by journal entry, prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination on such State highways or portions of State highways as the Director designates; 
(4)  28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such State highways or portions of State highways as the Director designates; 
(5)  (a)  97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or State route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or State route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount; 
(b)  75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations, when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate, United States route, or State route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount; 
(6)  65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in subsections (C)(3) and (4) and in subsection (E) hereof; 
(7)  45 feet for recreational vehicles. 
(8)  50 feet for all other vehicles except trailers and semitrailers, with or without load. 
(D)  No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of thirteen feet six inches, with or without load. 
(E)  An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a length of sixty-five feet and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of seventy-five feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of any stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter or a B-train assembly on any State highway or portion of any State highway that the Director designates. 
(F)  The widths prescribed in subsection (B) shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge. 
The width prescribed in subsection (B)(5) shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from each side of the vehicle. 
The lengths prescribed in subsections (C)(2) to (8) hereof shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or combination, nonproperty carrying devices or components that do not extend more than twenty-four inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigeration equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles whose dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
(G)  This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipal corporation or to the volunteer fire department of any municipal corporation or used by such department in the discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment. The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways and streets of this State shall comply with the rules of the Director governing such movement, that the Director may adopt. ORC 119.01 to 119.13 apply to any rules the Director adopts under this section, or the amendment or rescission of the rules, and any person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal as provided in those sections. 
This section does not require the State, the Municipality, County, township or any railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares in the Municipality. 
(H)  As used in this section, recreational vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4501.01. 
(ORC 5577.05) 
(I)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 5577.99) 
Sec. 339.04. - Route and load information. 
Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route. 
Sec. 339.05. - Wheel protectors. 
(A)  No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, upon the streets, bridges and culverts within this Municipality unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle. 
(ORC 5577.11) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 339.06. - Vehicles transporting explosives. 
(A)  Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than twenty-four inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white letters six inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation Regulations. 
(2)  Such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient points on such vehicle. 
(ORC 4513.29) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 339.07. - Towing requirements. 
(A)  When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby, and such drawbar or other connection shall not exceed fifteen feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered. 
(B)  When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white flag or cloth not less than twelve inches square. 
(C)  In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is being drawn. The chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle. 
(D)  Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility, as defined in ORC 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one time, except as follows: 
(1)  An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle; 
(2)  A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to be a motor vehicle. 
(ORC 4513.32) 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 339.08. - Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public place unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(B)  Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public place unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the street, highway or other public place. 
(ORC 4513.31) 
(C)  No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track or drop mud, stones, gravel or other similar material on any street, highway or other public place. 
(D)  It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops or deposits mud, stones, gravel or other similar material or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street, highway or other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(ORC 4513.31) 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.99) 
Sec. 339.09. - Shifting load; loose loads. 
(A)  In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same. 
(B)  No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes, poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth or a red light or lantern as required by Section 337.08. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 339.10. - Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains. 
(A)  No person shall drive over the improved streets of this Municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, or no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved streets of this Municipality, which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind. Traction engine or tractor, as used in this section, applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power. 
(ORC 5589.08) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 5589.99) 
Sec. 339.11. - Use of studded tires and chains. 
(A)  For purposes of this section, studded tire means any tire designed for use on a vehicle, and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. Motor vehicle, street or highway, public safety vehicle and school bus have the same meanings as given those terms in Chapter 301. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) hereof, no person shall operate any motor vehicle, other than a public safety vehicle or bus, that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway, except during the period extending from November 1 of each year through April 15 of the succeeding year. 
(2)  A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in subsection (B)(1) hereof. 
(C)  This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(ORC 5589.081) 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 5589.99) 
CHAPTER 341. - COMMERCIAL DRIVERS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Load limits, Ch. 339. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; disqualification, ORC 4506.16; suspension or revocation of license, ORC 4507.16; warning devices when disabled on freeways, ORC 4513.28; arrest notice of driver, ORC 5577.14. 

Sec. 341.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Alcohol concentration means the concentration of alcohol in a person's blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per the following: 
(1)  One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma; 
(2)  Two hundred ten liters of breath; 
(3)  One hundred milliliters of urine. 
(B)  Commercial driver's license means a license issued in accordance with ORC Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
(C)  Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds; 
(2)  Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more; 
(3)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport sixteen or more passengers including the driver; 
(4)  Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than sixteen passengers including the driver; 
(5)  Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended; 
(6)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane. 
(D)  Controlled substance means all of the following: 
(1)  Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the "Controlled Substances Act," 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C.A. 802(6), as amended; 
(2)  Any substance included in schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part 1308, as amended; 
(3)  Any drug of abuse. 
(E)  Disqualification means any of the following: 
(1)  The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person's privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle; 
(2)  Any withdrawal of a person's privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle defect violations; 
(3)  A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. 391. 
(F)  Drive means to drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(G)  Driver means any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's license. 
(H)  Driver's license means a license issued by the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles that authorizes an individual to drive. 
(I)  Drug of abuse means any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in ORC 4729.01 or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes. 
(J)  Employer means any person, including the Federal Government, any state and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle. 
(K)  Endorsement means an authorization on a person's commercial driver's license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial motor vehicle. 
(L)  Farm truck means a truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than one hundred fifty miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than one hundred fifty miles, of supplies for the farm, including tile, fence, and every other thing or commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this subsection and is not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in ORC 4923.01. 
(M)  Fatality means the death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident occurring not more than three hundred sixty-five days prior to the date of a death. 
(N)  Felony means any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death or specifically classified as a felony under the law of this State, regardless of the penalty that may be imposed. 
(O)  Foreign jurisdiction means any jurisdiction other than a state. 
(P)  Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit. 
(Q)  Hazardous materials means any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended. 
(R)  Motor vehicle means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail. 
(S)  Out-of-service order means a declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that a driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. 
(T)  Public safety vehicle has the same meaning as in divisions (E)(1) and (3) of ORC 4511.01. 
(U)  Recreational vehicle includes every vehicle that is defined as a recreational vehicle in ORC 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit. 
(V)  School bus has the same meaning as in ORC 4511.01. 
(W)  State means a state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia. 
(X)  Tester means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement entered into pursuant to ORC 4506.09. 
(Y)  United States means the fifty states and the District of Columbia. 
(Z)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4511.01. 
(ORC 4506.01) 
Sec. 341.02. - Exemptions. 
Section 341.02 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. Former ORC 4506.02 from which Section 341.02 was derived was repealed by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 68, effective June 29, 2005. The exemptions are now contained in Section 341.03. 
Sec. 341.03. - Prerequisites to operation of a commercial motor vehicle. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality unless the person holds, and has in the person's possession, any of the following: 
(a)  A valid commercial driver's license with proper endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, or by another jurisdiction recognized by this State; 
(b)  A valid examiner's commercial driving permit issued under ORC 4506.13; 
(c)  A valid restricted commercial driver's license and waiver for farm-related service industries issued under ORC 4506.24; 
(d)  A valid commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an authorized state driver's license examiner or tester or a person who has been issued and has in the person's immediate possession a current, valid commercial driver's license and who meets the requirements of ORC 4506.06(B). 
(2)  No person who has been a resident of this State for thirty days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(B)  Nothing in subsection (A) of this section applies to any qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following: 
(1)  A farm truck; 
(2)  Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district; 
(3)  A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons; 
(4)  A recreational vehicle; 
(5)  A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that requires additional assistance; 
(6)  A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components, including the Ohio national guard. This exception does not apply to United States reserved technicians. 
(7)  A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness purposes. Operated for nonbusiness purposes means that the commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as commerce is defined in 49 C.F.R. 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to ORC Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923. 
(8)  A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise. 
(9)  A police SWAT team vehicle. 
(10)  A police vehicle used to transport prisoners. 
(C)  Nothing contained in subsection (B)(5) of this section shall be construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule, or regulation of this State concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4506.03) 
Sec. 341.04. - Prohibitions. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person's possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one valid driver's license issued by this State, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction; 
(2)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality in violation of an out-of-service order, while the person's driving privilege is suspended, revoked or canceled, or while the person is subject to disqualification; 
(3)  Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality under authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this State for thirty days or longer. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4506.04) 
Sec. 341.05. - Criminal offenses. 
(A)  No person who holds a commercial driver's license, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle for which a commercial driver's license or permit is required shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measureable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person's blood, breath or urine; 
(2)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of four-hundredths of one per cent or more by whole blood or breath; 
(3)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one per cent or more by blood serum or blood plasma; 
(4)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of fifty-six-thousandths of one per cent or more by urine; 
(5)  Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance; 
(6)  Drive a motor vehicle in violation of ORC 4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in ORC 4511.181; 
(7)  Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony; 
(8)  Refuse to submit to a test under ORC 4506.17 or 4511.191; 
(9)  Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person's commercial driver's license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked, suspended, canceled, or disqualified; 
(10)  Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, the offenses of aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter; 
(11)  Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Sections 335.12 to 335.14; 
(12)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of ORC 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings; 
(13)  Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in ORC 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispose a controlled substance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 4506.15) 
Sec. 341.06. - Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles. 
(A)  Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver of a commercial motor vehicle to provide the information specified in ORC 4506.19. 
(B)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any of the following apply: 
(1)  The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended, revoked or canceled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction; 
(2)  The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign jurisdiction; 
(3)  The driver is subject to an out-of-service order in any state or a foreign jurisdiction; 
(4)  The driver has more than one driver's license. 
(C)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of Section 341.05. 
(D)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver's commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit. 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A), (B) or (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section may be assessed a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars. 
(ORC 4506.20) 
CHAPTER 343. - OPERATION OF UTILITY VEHICLES AND MINI-TRUCKS 

Sec. 343.1. - Definitions. 
(A)  Low-speed vehicle means a three- or four-wheeled motor vehicle with an attainable speed in one mile on a paved level surface of more than twenty miles per hour but not more than twenty-five miles per hour and with a gross vehicle weight rating less than three thousand pounds. 
(B)  Under-speed vehicle means a three- or four-wheeled vehicle, including a vehicle commonly known as a golf cart, with an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than twenty miles per hour and with a gross vehicle weight rating less than three thousand pounds. 
(C)  Utility vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle designed with a bed, principally recreation and/or for the purpose of transporting material or cargo in connection with construction, agricultural, forestry, grounds maintenance, lawn and garden, materials handling, or similar activities. 
(D)  Mini-truck means a vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric motor with a rated power of seven thousand five hundred watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of six hundred sixty cubic centimeters or less, has a total dry weight of nine hundred to two thousand two hundred pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards. 
(E)  Operator includes any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a low-speed vehicle, under-speed vehicle, utility vehicle or mini-truck upon the public roadways or highways. 
(F)  Owner means a person that possesses the ownership title, or some other proof of ownership, to a low-speed vehicle, under-speed vehicle, utility vehicle or mini-truck. 
(G)  Any term not defined in this section shall have the same meaning as defined in the Ohio Revised code. 
(Ord. No. 12-18 ,  I, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 343.2 - Operation and restrictions. 
Subject to the requirements and conditions set forth herein, the operation of utility vehicles and mini-trucks shall be permitted within the City of Marysville. The operation of low-speed vehicles and under-speed vehicles is prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall operate a utility vehicle or mini-truck upon Main Street or Fifth Street or upon any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. This section does not prohibit an operator of a utility vehicle or mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway that has a speed limit greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(B)  The operator of any utility vehicle or mini-truck on a street or highway within the City of Marysville must be at least eighteen (18) years old and have a valid operator's license and have proof of insurance for the vehicle in accordance with Section 4509.101. 
(C)  Utility vehicles and mini-trucks must be operated in accord with all State of Ohio traffic laws in addition to the applicable sections of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances. 
(D)  Prior to the operation on the streets or highways within the City of Marysville, the owner of a utility vehicle or mini-truck must obtain a Certificate of Inspection from the Union County Sheriff's Office, and such Certificate of Inspection shall be valid at the time of operation. 
(E)  No person shall operate a utility vehicle or mini-truck on a sidewalk, walking path or multi-use path. 
(F)  Any child who falls under the child restraint criteria set by Ohio Revised Code Section 4511.81 is prohibited from being a passenger in a utility vehicle or mini-truck operated on any street or highway in the City of Marysville. 
(G)  A utility vehicle or mini-truck shall be registered in accordance with Section 4503 of the Ohio Revised Code and titled in accordance with Section 4505 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(H)  This Chapter does not apply to the use of low-speed vehicles, under-speed vehicles, utility vehicles or mini-trucks by employees of the City of Marysville or Union County while in the course of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 12-18 ,  I, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 343.99 - Penalties. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 12-18 ,  I, 2-12-2018) 
TITLE SEVEN - PARKING 
CHAPTER 351. - PARKING GENERALLY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle,  303.03; parking near stopped fire apparatus,  331.27; lights on parked or stopped vehicles,  337.09. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; owner nonliability, lease defense, ORC 4511.071. 

Sec. 351.01. - Police may remove unattended vehicle which obstructs traffic. 
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(ORC 4511.67) 
Sec. 351.02. - Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking. 
In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima-facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such ownership. 
Sec. 351.03. - Prohibited standing or parking places. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(A)  On a sidewalk, curb or street lawn area, except a bicycle; no part of any vehicle, trailer or cargo shall obstruct a sidewalk, regardless of whether the vehicle, trailer or cargo is otherwise parked in a driveway; 
(B)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(C)  Within an intersection; 
(D)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(E)  On a crosswalk; 
(F)  Within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(G)  Within thirty feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control device; 
(H)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by a traffic control device; 
(I)  Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(J)  Within twenty feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs; 
(K)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(L)  Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(M)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street, or within a street tunnel; (ORC 4511.68) 
(N)  At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, or where the curbing or street is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of the maximum time limited by signs. This includes posted temporary "no parking zones" established by the City of Marysville, Union County, the Department of Transportation or any other authorized entity. 
(O)  Within one foot of another parked vehicle; 
(P)  On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway. 
(Q)  At any place where signs designate "Resident Permit Parking Only" unless a valid City-issued resident permit parking tag is clearly displayed in the vehicle. 
(Ord. 72-14. Passed 11-6-2014; Ord. 5-17 . Passed 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 351.04. - Parking near curb; handicapped locations on public and private lots and garages. 
(A)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb side wheels of such vehicle parallel with and not more than twelve inches from the curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. 
(B)  (1)  This subsection does not apply to streets or parts thereof where angle parking is lawfully permitted. However, no angle parking shall be permitted on a state route unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than twenty-five feet is available for free-moving traffic. 
(2)  (a)  No angled parking space that is located on a state route within a municipal corporation is subject to elimination, irrespective of whether there is or is not at least twenty-five feet of unoccupied roadway width available for free-moving traffic at the location of that angled parking space, unless the municipal corporation approves of the elimination of the angled parking space. 
(b)  Replacement, repainting or any other repair performed by or on behalf of the municipal corporation of the lines that indicate the angled parking space does not constitute an intent by the municipal corporation to eliminate the angled parking space. 
(C)  (1)  Vehicle Direction. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(b) hereof, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or highway. 
(b)  The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or highway. 
(2)  The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in subsection (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered. 
(D)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any rule, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of facilities near, on, over or under a street, may stop, stand or park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty, or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
(E)  Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces shall be provided and designated by the Municipality and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities, where parking is provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this subsection and ORC 3781.111 (C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location. 
(F)  (1)  Stopping, Standing or Parkparking Motor Vehicles at Special Parking Locations. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under subsection (E) hereof, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with subsection (E) hereof, unless one of the following applies: 
i.  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; 
ii.  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking location in violation of subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the Police Department. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. 
(c)  If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than seventy-two hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria contained in ORC 4503.44(A)(1). 
(2)  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location provided under subsection (E) of this section or at a special clearly marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that subsection. 
(G)  When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Handicapped person means any person who has lost the use of one or both legs, or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or so severely handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary or other handicapping condition. 
(2)  Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk has the same meaning as in ORC 4503.44. 
(3)  Special license plates and removable windshield placard mean any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued under ORC 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country or sovereignty. 
(ORC 4511.69) 
Sec. 351.05. - Manner of angle parking. 
Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
Sec. 351.06. - Advertising, selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any highway for the principal purpose of: 
(A)  Displaying it for sale; 
(B)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(C)  Advertising. 
(Ord. 472. Passed 3-27-1947.) 
Sec. 351.07. - Unattended vehicle: duty to stop engine, remove key, set brake and turn wheels. 
(A)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the engine, locking of the ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property; 
(2)  A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked; 
(3)  An emergency vehicle; 
(4)  A public safety vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.661) 
Sec. 351.08. - Opening vehicle door on traffic side. 
No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(ORC 4511.70(C)) 
Sec. 351.09. - Passenger and truck loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any place marked as a passenger or loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger and loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading materials exceed thirty minutes, and for loading and unloading passengers three minutes. 
(Ord. 472. Passed 3-27-1947.) 
Sec. 351.10. - Bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(A)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs. 
(B)  The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted as such, except in case of an emergency. 
(C)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(D)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking provisions at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
Sec. 351.11. - Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions. 
(A)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during actual loading or unloading or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, or a police officer. 
(B)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 472. Passed 3-27-1947.) 
Sec. 351.12. - Prohibition against parking on streets or highways. 
Upon any street or highway outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street or highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of such street or highway. In every event, a clear and unobstructed portion of the street or highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such street or highway. 
This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position. 
(ORC 4511.66) 
Sec. 351.13. - Parking on posted private property. 
If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous manner, prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the following: 
(A)  Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's consent; 
(B)  Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or regulation posted by the owner. 
(ORC 4511.681) 
Sec. 351.14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20-15 repealed  351.14, which pertained to parking after heavy snowfall. 
Sec. 351.15. - Fire lanes. 
(A)  Fire lanes means any public street, public alley or established roadway proximate to buildings on private property in the City which must be kept open and unobstructed so that fire vehicles and equipment may pass through as so designated by the Fire Marshal. 
(B)  No person shall park any vehicle or in any other way obstruct any public street, public alley or established roadway on private property which has been designated by the Fire Marshal as a fire lane and the Police Division shall remove any vehicle or obstruction of any fire lane at the expense of the owner thereof and shall impound such vehicle until towing charges, fine and costs are paid in full. 
(Ord. 1094-80. Passed 11-13-1980.) 
Sec. 351.16. - Parking within marked lines. 
No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space in such a way that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated by marked lines. The Superintendent of Streets shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking space. 
(Ord. 4-95. Passed 2-9-1995.) 
Sec. 351.17. - Parking hours in parking zones. 
No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name or operated or controlled by him to be upon any street within a parking zone for more than 120 consecutive minutes, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays established by the State of Ohio or the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 4-95. Passed 2-9-1995.) 
Sec. 351.17.01. - Parking of inoperable vehicles. 
No person shall park or store an inoperable vehicle for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours on public property, which includes but is not limited to, municipal parking lots, streets and alleys within the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. No. 44-18 ,  I, 6-25-2018) 
Sec. 351.18. - Parking zones designated. 
The following portions of streets are established as parking zones: 
(A)  Sixth Street between Court and Plum Streets - both sides. 
(B)  Plum Street between Fourth and Sixth Streets - both sides. 
(C)  Fourth Street between Court and Plum Streets - both sides. 
(D)  Fifth Street between Walnut and Court Streets and the Public Square - both sides. 
(E)  Fifth Street between Court Street and the alley west of the courthouse - both sides. 
(F)  Main Street from Third to Seventh Streets and the Public Square - both sides. 
(G)  Court Street between Fourth and Sixth Streets - both sides. 
(Ord. 4-95. Passed 2-9-1995.) 
Sec. 351.19. - Parking in city parking lots. 
(A)  City parking lots shall be designated and posted for free parking for the general public use. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name or operated or controlled by him to remain in or upon any parking space in a City parking lot for more than 24 consecutive hours. 
(B)  The Director of Administration, through the Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to issue "no charge" parking permits to residents of apartments or delivery vehicles owned and operated by businesses for those apartments and businesses located within the area bound by Fourth Street, Sixth Street, Plum Street and Court Street. The 24 hour limit will not apply to vehicles displaying a proper permit in City parking lots. 
(Ord. 4-95. Passed 2-9-1995.) 
Sec. 351.20. - City parking lots designated. 
City parking lots shall be those located as follows: 
(A)  At the southeast corner of S. Main Street and E. 6th Street. 
(B)  The north one half of the lot south of the fire station and west of S. Main Street. 
(C)  At the northwest corner of E. 6th and S. Plum Streets. 
(D)  At the southwest corner of E. 4th and N. Plum Streets. 
(Ord. 4-95. Passed 2-9-1995.) 
Sec. 351.21. - Parking for street sweeping and snow removal. 
(A)  For the purposes of street sweeping and snow removal, no person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked in the areas specified below between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.: 
(1)  Fifth Street - Court Street to Walnut Street. 
(2)  Main Street - Sixth Street to Third Street. 
(B)  The Administration is instructed to erect appropriate signs bearing the words "No Parking - Tow Away Zone 3:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.", or equivalent words. 
(Ord. 21-15. Passed 7-9-2015.) 
Sec. 351.22. - Parking commercial vehicles and recreational equipment. 
(A)  No person shall park a school bus, commercial tractor, agricultural tractor, commercial truck as defined in ORC 4501.01(J), bus, a vehicle originally manufactured and/or designed as a bus, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, moving van, ambulance or hearse, or other than recreational equipment as defined in Section 351.22(C), for a period in excess of one hour on any street any time within the City, except when loading or unloading such vehicle, and then only for the length of time sufficient to accommodate such purpose. 
(B)  No person shall park recreational equipment on any street or highway within the City for a period in excess of four consecutive hours. 
(C)  As used in this chapter, recreational equipment shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer, a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the manufacturer; 
(2)  Pick-up camper, a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pick-up or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it as suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses; 
(3)  Motor home, a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; 
(4)  Folding tent trailer, a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use; 
(5)  Boats and boat trailers, including but not limited to jet skis and rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport same on a public roadway; 
(6)  Antique motor vehicle, including collector's vehicles licensed pursuant to ORC 4503.45 and historical motor vehicles licensed pursuant to ORC 4503.181; 
(7)  Licensed private trailer, designed and intended to haul personal property; 
(8)  Other recreational equipment, including but not limited to snowmobiles, parade floats, and other such equipment as determined by the Police Chief. 
(Ord. 30-03. Passed 9-11-2003.) 
Sec. 351.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any owner or operator who has received notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge listed in subsection (E) hereof may within fourteen days, answer to the Director of Finance to the charges set forth in such notice by paying the prescribed fine and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the Marysville Director of Finance to make such plea and pay such fine into the City Treasury. In lieu of appearance before the Marysville Director of Finance, such payment may be made by depositing the fine in an envelope so provided and dropping the envelope in the night box at City Hall. 
(B)  If a fine is not paid as provided in subsection (A) hereof, then a traffic court summons shall be sent by first class mail to the registered owner of the improperly parked vehicle notifying the owner that he shall pay to the Director of Finance, within fourteen days after mailing, a fine in the amount of an additional amount equal to the original fine, instead of the fine prescribed as set forth in the schedule of fines in subsection (E) hereof. 
(C)  If the owner or operator does not wish to plead guilty, he may, prior to fourteen days after the mailing of the notice in subsection (E) hereof, appear in Municipal Court and request a hearing upon the charge. 
(D)  Such owner or operator who fails to pay his fine in one of the above prescribed manners or to appear in Municipal Court within the periods of time above specified, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(E)  Schedule of Fines. 
Violation Amount of Fine Overtime parking at a limited area $20.00 Each additional overtime hour parked at a limited area $10.00 Parking in prohibited area $20.00 Prohibited parking in handicapped area $75.00 Parking on sidewalk $20.00 Blocking driveway $20.00 Parking on crosswalk $20.00 Parking in loading zone $20.00 Improper parking $10.00 Parking within ten feet of fire hydrant $50.00 Parking in fire lane $50.00 Prohibited parking of a heavy truck or recreational equipment $25.00  
If a person who is personally or constructively served with a parking ticket fails to answer the charge within ten days of the issuance of the ticket, the amount of the fine will double. 
(F)  Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle parked in violation of a provision(s) of Section 351.03 - 351.22. The expense of removal, conveyance or towing of a vehicle, and the expense of the storage thereof, shall be borne by the owner of the vehicle and shall be paid before the vehicle is released from the storage area. 
(Ord. 14-95. Passed 4-11-1995; Ord. 30-03. Passed 9-11-2003; Ord. 72-14. Passed 11-6-2014.) 
Editor's note- See Section 303.99 for misdemeanor classifications and penalties. 
CHAPTER 353. - PARKING VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 353.01. - General requirements. 
(A)  A parking ticket shall be the summons and complaint for purposes of issuing parking ticket citations. The provisions of this chapter and all actions taken pursuant to this chapter are civil and remedial in nature and not designed to punish the offender and are not criminal offenses. No violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor of any class, and no person shall be arrested for a violation of this chapter or Chapter 351. 
(B)  Each parking citation issued shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and phone number of the Marysville Parking Violations Bureau; 
(2)  The procedure to answer the charge as set forth in Section 353.04(A); 
(3)  The specific ordinance allegedly violated with a description of the offense; 
(4)  Any penalty for not paying the ticket within the time prescribed; and 
(5)  Any other information as required by Section 353.02(A). 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.02. - Procedures. 
(A)  A parking enforcement officer or police officer who issues a parking ticket for a parking infraction shall complete the ticket by identifying the parking infraction charged, recording the license plate number, type, and make or model of the vehicle, and indicating the date, time, and place of the parking infraction charged. The officer shall sign the ticket and affirm the facts it contains. If the operator of the vehicle is present, the officer also shall record on the ticket the name of the operator in a space provided on the ticket for identification of the offender, and then shall personally serve the parking ticket upon the operator. If the operator of the vehicle is not present, the officer shall insert the word "owner" in the space provided on the ticket upon the owner of the vehicle by affixing the ticket to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
Constructive service of a parking ticket upon an owner of a vehicle by affixation as provided in this division, or by the procedure described in subsection (E) hereof, has the same force and effect, and potentially subjects both the owner and the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission results in the parking infraction, if different, to the same fine and the same penalties for failure to timely answer or to appear, if a hearing is requested, as if the parking ticket were personally served on both the owner and operator of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(B)  The original of a parking ticket issued pursuant to this section or any true copy of it shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the local authority and of the law enforcement agency whose officer issued it, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts it contains. 
(C)  An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner of the vehicle, but who operates it with the express or implied permission of the owner is the agent of the owner for purposes of the receipt of parking tickets served in accordance with this section, and personal service of a parking ticket upon the operator in accordance with this section constitutes constructive service upon the owner for purposes of this chapter. The operator of a rented or leased vehicle whose act or omission resulted in an alleged parking infraction shall not be considered an agent of the owner if the owner is engaged in the business of renting and leasing vehicles pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement and if the owner follows the procedures set forth in section 4521.09 of the Revised Code. 
(D)  Except as provided in section 4521.09 of the Revised Code, when a parking ticket is issued for a parking infraction and is served pursuant to this section, the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission resulted in the parking infraction for which the ticket was issued and the owner of the vehicle involved in the parking infraction, if different, are jointed liable for the parking infraction and any fine or penalty arising out of the parking infraction under an ordinance, resolution, or regulation enacted by the local authority pursuant to division (A) of section 4521.02 of the Revised Code. Any owner of a vehicle who pays any fine or penalty imposed for a parking infraction pursuant to this chapter may recover the amount paid from the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission resulted in the parking infraction. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.03. - Parking ticket violations bureau. 
(A)  The Marysville Parking Violations Bureau shall have the jurisdiction over any parking infraction that is in violation of any City parking ordinance. All parking infractions that are in violation of a City ordinance and that occur within the City limits of Marysville shall be handled pursuant to and be governed by this chapter and Chapter 4521, Ohio Revised Code, when applicable. 
(B)  Personnel. 
(1)  The Finance Director is hereby appointed Clerk of the Marysville Parking Violations Bureau. 
(2)  The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint a hearing examiner who shall hear challenges to parking tickets at hearings set by the Parking Violations Bureau. At such hearing the rules of evidence need not be strictly followed. 
(3)  The Mayor shall assign such other duties to city personnel as is necessary to properly operate the Parking Violations Bureau. 
(C)  All fines and penalties established for a parking infraction shall be collected by the Finance Director and paid into the City Treasury. 
(D)  The costs of proceedings shall be administratively determined by the Mayor. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.04. - Answer to charges. 
(A)  A person who is served with a parking ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction may answer the charge by personal appearance at the Marysville City Hall during normal business hours or by mail. The answer shall be made within ten days of the issuance of the parking ticket (the mailing must be postmarked within ten days of the issuance of the ticket) and shall be: 
(1)  An admission that the person committed the parking infraction by payment of the fine. 
(2)  A denial that the infraction occurred and a request for a hearing. A denial must be written on the back of the ticket when a denial is entered. Otherwise, the person need only pay the fine to the Clerk. 
(B)  When a person denies that he has committed a parking violation, he shall be granted a hearing which shall be civil in nature. The Bureau shall set a date for the hearing and notify the person, in writing, of the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Examiner in accordance with ORC Section 4521.08 which, in its entirety, is incorporated herein by reference. 
(C)  A person who admits that he committed a parking infraction shall pay the fine to the violations clerk of the bureau to which the answer is made. 
(D)  If a person fails to timely answer a parking ticket citation, after that person has been personally or constructively served with the citation charging the offense, the City of Marysville Parking Violations Bureau shall issue a notice of infraction and shall proceed pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code Section 4521.07. Failure to answer a charge may result in the imposition of additional penalties set forth in this chapter and Section 351.99. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.05. - Failure to answer; procedures. 
(A)  When a person is personally or constructively served with a parking ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction and the person fails to answer the charge within the time specified by the local authority, the Marysville Parking Violations Bureau shall send notifications of infraction as follows: 
(1)  If the person who fails to answer was the operator of the vehicle involved in the parking infraction at the time of the commission of the parking infraction and was personally served with the parking ticket, a notification of infraction shall be sent to that person, and additionally if such person is not the owner of the vehicle, as determined from the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, a notification of infraction also shall be sent to the owner at his most recent address appearing in such records; 
(2)  If the person who fails to answer was the owner of the vehicle and was constructively served with the parking ticket, a notification of infraction shall be sent to the owner at his most recent address appearing in the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. 
(B)  A notification of infraction shall be sent within twelve months after the expiration of the time specified by the local authority pursuant to section 4521.02 of the Revised Code for the making of answer, shall be sent by first class mail, and shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  An identification of the parking infraction with which the person was charged and the time and date of the parking infraction, which identification may be a copy of the parking ticket charging the parking infraction that was personally or constructively served upon the person; 
(2)  An identification of the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs arising out of the parking infraction that are due; 
(3)  A warning that the person must answer the parking infraction charged in the ticket within thirty days or a default civil judgment in the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs due may be entered against the person; 
(4)  A description of the allowable answers that may be made and notification that the person will be afforded a hearing before the Bureau Hearing Examiner if he denies in his answer that he committed the parking infraction; 
(5)  An identification of the manners in which and the entity to which an answer may be made; 
(6)  A warning that if the person fails to appear at a requested hearing, a default civil judgment in the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs due may be entered against the person; 
(7)  A warning that the registration of the vehicle involved in the parking infraction, if the vehicle is registered in this State, may not be renewed or transferred if a civil judgment or a default civil judgment is entered against the person until the judgment is paid or until it is otherwise finally disposed of in a manner specified in this chapter. 
(C)  A person who receives a notification of infraction pursuant to this section may answer the parking infraction with which he is charged that is identified in the notification of infraction in any of the manners provided in Section 353.04. An answer under this section shall be made within thirty days after the date on which the notification of infraction was mailed, and shall be in one of the forms specified in Section 353.04 for answers to parking infractions charged in a parking ticket, except that if the answer includes payment of the fine arising out of the parking infraction any penalty arising out of such infraction also shall be paid. The answer shall be governed by the provisions of Section 353.04 for answers relative to parking infractions charged in a parking ticket. 
(D)  If a person who is issued a notification of infraction fails to timely answer, as provided in subsequent (C) hereof, the failure to answer shall be considered an admission that the person committed the parking infraction, and a default civil judgment, in the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs due may be entered against the person. Failure to timely answer the parking infraction identified in the notification of infraction may result in the imposition of the additional penalties prescribed by the chapter. 
(E)  The sending of a notification of infraction, the filing of or failure to file an answer by the person to whom it is sent, the substance of an answer, the payment of any fine, and any other relevant information shall be entered in the records of the Marysville Parking Violations Bureau. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.06. - Proceeding against owner who was not operator; rental vehicles. 
Section 4521.09 of the Ohio Revised Code shall govern proceedings against an owner who was not the operator of the vehicle and rental vehicles. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
Sec. 353.07. - Proceeds against registration of motor vehicle. 
In addition to any other penalty otherwise provided by law, if three or more judgments or default judgments have been entered against a person and the person has not paid the judgments or default judgments within ten days of the date of entry of the third judgment, the Marysville Parking Violations Bureau may give notice of that fact to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles. The notice, if given, shall be given not earlier than sixteen days nor later than three years after the date of entry of the third judgment, and shall be in a form and manner, and contain such information, as the Registrar of Motor Vehicles prescribes. The provisions of ORC Section 4521.10 shall govern the vehicular registration issuance. 
(Ord. 33-01. Passed 7-26-2001.) 
TITLE NINE - PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES 
CHAPTER 371. - PEDESTRIANS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Pedestrian defined,  301.22; pedestrian prohibited on freeways,  303.06; obedience to traffic control devices,  313.01,313.03; pedestrian control signals,  313.05. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law. 

Sec. 371.01. - Right-of-way in crosswalk. 
(A)  When traffic control signals are not in place, not in operation or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield or if required by Section 313.09, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(B)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(C)  Subsection (A) hereof does not apply under the conditions stated in Section 371.03(B). 
(D)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
(E)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.46) 
Sec. 371.02. - Right-of-way of blind person. 
(A)  As used in this section blind person or blind pedestrian means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater then twenty degrees. 
The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is predominately white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip. 
(B)  No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway, street, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry a white metallic cane, with or without a red tip. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.47) 
Sec. 371.03. - Crossing roadway outside crosswalk; diagonal crossings at intersections. 
(A)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(B)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway. 
(C)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(D)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(E)  This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway. 
(F)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.48) 
Sec. 371.04. - Moving upon right half of crosswalk. 
(A)  Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.49) 
Sec. 371.05. - Walking along highways. 
(A)  Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(B)  Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
(C)  Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 313.03 and 371.01, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(E)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.50) 
Sec. 371.06. - Use of highway for soliciting a ride; riding on outside of vehicles. 
(A)  No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(B)  No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency. 
(C)  No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or ride on the outside of, any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency. 
(D)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semi trailer shall knowingly permit any person who has not attained the age of sixteen years to ride in the unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the vehicle is traveling faster than twenty-five milers per hour, unless either of the following applies: 
(1)  The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in ORC 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled and the person riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; 
(2)  An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or semi trailer. 
(E)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semi trailer shall permit any person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency to ride in the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the tailgate is unlatched. 
(F)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (E) to (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 47-05. Passed 7-28-2005.) 
Sec. 371.07. - Right-of-way on sidewalk. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.441) 
Sec. 371.08. - Yielding to public safety vehicle. 
(A)  Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle as stated in Section 331.21, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle. 
(B)  This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.452) 
Sec. 371.09. - Walking on highway while under the influence. 
(A)  A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.481) 
Sec. 371.10. - On bridges or railroad crossings. 
(A)  No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(B)  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.511) 
Sec. 371.11. - Persons operating motorized wheelchairs. 
(A)  Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this Traffic Code, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
(ORC 4511.491) 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.99) 
Sec. 371.12. - Electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(A)  (1)  Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(B)  No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered vehicles at all times; 
(2)  Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian; 
(3)  Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following: 
(a)  A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet; 
(b)  A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has an established speed limit of fifty-five miles per hour or more; 
(5)  Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path; 
(6)  If under eighteen years of age, operate the device unless wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened; 
(7)  If under sixteen years of age, operate the device unless, during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of another person who is eighteen years of age or older and is responsible for the immediate care of the person under sixteen years of age. 
(C)  No person who is under fourteen years of age shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(D)  No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT - HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS". 
(ORC 4511.512) 
(E)  Electric personal assistive mobility device means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of seven hundred fifty watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs one hundred seventy pounds has a maximum speed of less than twenty miles per hour. 
(ORC 4501.01) 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (B) or (C) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00). 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of ORC 4511.512 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing the fine required under subsection (F)(1) hereof, shall do one of the following: 
(a)  Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more than thirty days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was involved in the current violation of that section. The court shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than five dollars ($5.00) per day, provided the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or subsequent release shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to subsection (F)(2)(a) hereof, issue an order prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than thirty days. 
(G)  Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.512) 
CHAPTER 373. - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, SCOOTERS AND ROLLER SKATES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycle defined,  301.04; motorcycle defined,  301.19; bicycles prohibited on freeways,  303.06; motorcycle operator's license required,  335.01(A); motorcycle headlight,  337.03; motorcycle brakes,  337.18(B). 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; motorcycle protective equipment, OAC Ch. 4501-17; motorized bicycle equipment, OAC Ch. 4501-23. 

Sec. 373.01. - Code application to bicycles motorcycles and motorized bicycles. 
(A)  The provisions of this Traffic Code which are applicable to bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(ORC 4511.52) 
The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to bicycles except those which by their nature are not applicable. (Adopting Ordinance) 
(B)  The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code shall be applied to the operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles, except that no motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall be operated as follows: 
(1)  On any property owned or leased by the City, except on a roadway prepared for vehicular travel; or 
(2)  On any private property, or any nursery or planting area, without the written permission of the owner or other person having the right to possession of the property. 
(Ord. 60-84. Passed 12-27-1984.) 
Sec. 373.02. - Riding upon seats; handle bars; helmets and glasses. 
(A)  For purposes of this section snowmobile has the same meaning as given that term in ORC 4519.01. 
(B)  No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, or carry any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat. 
(C)  No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle. 
(D)  No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
(E)  No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat other than while sitting upon the seat. 
(F)  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars. 
(G)  No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the operator's seat or saddle. 
(H)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (H)(2) of this section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in subsection (I)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of eighteen years, or who holds a motorcycle operator's endorsement or license bearing "novice" designation that is currently in effect as provided in ORC 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a United States Department of Transportation-approved protective helmet on the person's head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this subsection or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action. 
(2)  Subsection (H)(1) of this section does not apply to a person operating an autocycle or cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants. 
(I)  (1)  No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to ORC 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person's head a protective helmet that has been approved by the United States Department of Transportation that conforms with rules adopted by the Director. 
(2)  No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar pursuant to ORC 4507.05 in any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  At any time when lighted lights are required by Section 337.02(A)(1); 
(b)  While carrying a passenger; 
(c)  On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway. 
(J)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is firmly attached to the bicycle. 
(K)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.53) 
Sec. 373.03. - Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle. 
(A)  No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway. This section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.54) 
Sec. 373.04. - Riding bicycles and motorcycles abreast. 
(A)  Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.55(B)) 
Sec. 373.05. - Signal device on bicycle. 
(A)  A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.56) 
Sec. 373.06. - Lights and reflector on bicycle; brakes. 
(A)  Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in Section 337.02, shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front; and three hundred feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement. 
(2)  A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 
(3)  A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red reflector; If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required. 
(B)  Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those required under subsection (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle. 
(C)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a street or highway. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.56) 
Sec. 373.07. - Riding bicycle on right side of roadway; obedience to traffic rules; passing. 
(A)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(B)  This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.55(A)) 
Sec. 373.08. - Reckless operation; control, course and speed. 
(A)  No person shall operate a bicycle: 
(1)  Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property; 
(2)  Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle; 
(3)  In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law; 
(4)  Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in Section 373.02(D); 
(5)  At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 373.09. - Parking of bicycle. 
(A)  No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner so as to unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic or upon a roadway so as to unduly interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(B)  No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the central business district of the City, as defined in Section 373.10 except upon bike racks provided by the City. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Adopting Ordinance; Ord. 944-74. Passed 5-9-1974.) 
Sec. 373.10. - Riding bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller blades and roller skates on sidewalks. 
(A)  No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller blades or roller skates upon a sidewalk in the central business district of the City, which is defined as the area within one block of the intersection of Fifth and Main Streets. 
(B)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller blades or roller skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(C)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the foregoing if the cyclist is a Law Enforcement Officer, in uniform, and riding a bicycle owned by the City of Marysville. 
(D)  Skateboards and Scooters without limitation, include any vehicle or device consisting basically of a board, plank or platform mounted on wheels or rollers, whether propelled by gravity, muscle power, or mechanical means, which is not equipped with a positive mechanical means of steering such vehicle or device. Roller blades means a device with three or more in-line wheels and a platform affixed to the operator's shoes or a device with three or more in-line wheels that is permanently affixed to boots or shoes to be worn by the operator and capable of being propelled by gravity, or muscle power and which is not equipped with a mechanical means of steering. Roller skates means a device with four wheels and platform affixed to the operator's shoes or a device with four wheels that is permanently affixed to boots or shoes to be worn by the operator and capable of being propelled by gravity or muscle power and which is not equipped with a positive, mechanical means of steering. 
(E)  Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 17-02. Passed 4-25-2002.) 
Sec. 373.11. - Motorized bicycle operation, equipment and license. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person is fourteen or fifteen years of age and holds a valid probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in ORC 4511.521, or the person is sixteen years of age or older and holds either a valid commercial driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4506, or a driver's license issued under ORC Chapter 4507, or a valid motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in ORC 4511.521, except that if a person is sixteen years of age, has a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in ORC 4511.521; 
(2)  The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety and is in proper working order; 
(3)  The person, if under eighteen years of age, is wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened, and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rear-view mirror; 
(4)  The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles; and 
(5)  The motorized bicycle displays on the rear of such bicycle the current license plate or validation sticker furnished by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under ORC 4503.191. 
(B)  No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person upon the motorized bicycle. 
(C)  Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.521) 
Sec. 373.12. - Bicycle and motorized bicycle license required. 
(A)  No person shall operate or use a bicycle upon the streets, alleys, parkways, sidewalks, public parks or highways of the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the Police Division. 
(1)  Bicycle as used in Sections 373.12 through 373.20 shall include both bicycle and motorized bicycle as defined in Section 301.04. 
(2)  Operation or use of a bicycle , as used in this section, means any occasion of such operation or use by a persons who has, or intends to, regularly or frequently operate or use a bicycle in the City. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.13. - Period of license. 
The Police Division is hereby authorized and directed to issue, through personnel of that Division or such other persons as it may authorize, upon application and payment of the fee provided therefor, bicycle licenses which shall be effective until the bicycle changes ownership. Such license shall entitle the licensee to operate, or permit another to operate, the bicycle for which such license has been issued, upon all the streets, alleys, parkways, sidewalks, public parks and highways of the City, except in such places where operation of bicycles may be prohibited by other sections of this Traffic Code. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.14. - License seals and registration cards; records. 
The City shall provide license seals together with registration cards. Such license seals and registration cards shall have numbers placed thereon in numerical order, beginning with the number one, and shall indicate the year in which the same are issued. Such license seals shall be suitable for attachment upon the bicycles and it shall be the duty of the Police Division, or its authorized agent, to attach one such license seal to each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license fee herein provided for. Such license seal shall remain attached during the existence of such license. The Division shall also keep a record of the date of issuance of each license, to whom it is issued and the number thereof. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.15. - Reports of dealers. 
(A)  All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make reports within ten days to the Police Division giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof and the number of the license seal found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to keep for a period to two years a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom a bicycle is sold and the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and the frame number thereof, and the number of the license seal attached thereto, if any. No person engaged in the sale of secondhand bicycles shall sell any such bicycle until a report of its purchase from the previous owner has been made as herein required. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.16. - Reports of registration transfers. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police Division the registration card issued to such person a licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report shall be made within five days of the date of such sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five days of the sale or transfer. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 25-09, passed June 11, 2009, repealed  373.17, which pertained to license fees. 
Sec. 373.18. - Altering appearance of bicycle. 
(A)  Any owner of a licensed bicycle who alters the appearance of the bicycle by changing the color thereof, or by changing, adding to or removing any part of or accessory thereto, so that a substantial difference in its appearance results, is required to report such change to the Police Division with his registration card, within three days, for correction of its description on the records of the Division. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.19. - Altering identification prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall purposely or knowingly remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license seal or registration card during the time in which such license seal or registration card is operative. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the Police Division from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.20. - Damaging bicycles prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall, purposely and without authority from the owner, ride or use any bicycle. 
(B)  No person shall, purposely and knowingly, damage or alter the appearance of any part of or accessory to the bicycle of another person, without the consent of such owner. 
(C)  No person shall place any substance upon the working parts of a bicycle, with intent to injure, damage or impede the working parts of the bicycle. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 1089-80. Passed 8-28-1980.) 
Sec. 373.21. - Paths exclusively for bicycles. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of the Ohio Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director's jurisdiction. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.713) 
Sec. 373.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 303.99 for misdemeanor classifications and penalties. 
CHAPTER 375. - SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL PURPOSE VEHICLES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Street or highway defined, 301.42; required usage of helmets and safety glasses, 373.02(F). 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; lights, brakes and muffler, OAC Ch. 4501.29; power of trial court of record to impound registration certificate for certain violations, ORC 4519.47; power to regulate; municipal licensing prohibited, ORC 4519.48. 

Sec. 375.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Snowmobile means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads. 
(ORC 4519.01(A)) 
(B)  All purpose vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. All-purpose vehicle does not include a utility vehicle as defined in ORC 4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under ORC Chapter 4503 or Chapter 4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Section 301.20 of this Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4519.01(B)) 
(C)  Owner means any person, firm or corporation, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle, or other right to the possession thereof. 
(ORC 4519.01(C)) 
(D)  Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all purpose vehicle. 
(E)  Limited access highway or freeway means a highway especially designed for through traffic and over which abutting property owners have no easement or right of access by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such highway, and access to which may be allowed only at highway intersections designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
(ORC 5511.02) 
(F)  Interstate highway means any part of the interstate system of highways as defined in subsection (E), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C.A. 103, and amendments thereof. 
(G)  Off-highway motorcycle means every motorcycle, as defined in ORC 4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway. 
(ORC 4519.01) 
Sec. 375.02. - Equipment. 
(A)  Equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles shall include, but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following items: 
(1)  At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness; 
(2)  At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness; 
(3)  Adequate brakes. Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in not more than forty feet from an initial steady speed of twenty miles per hour, or locking its traction belt. 
(4)  A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed eighty-two decibels on the "A" scale at fifty feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970). 
(B)  No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified in subsections (A)(1) and (2) hereof shall not be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all purpose vehicles operated during the daylight hours. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (B) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of subsection (B) of this section, whoever violates subsection (B) of this section shall be fined not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not more than three days, or both. 
(ORC 4519.20) 
Sec. 375.03. - Code application; prohibited operation. 
(A)  The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code shall be applied to the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles; except that no snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle shall be operated as follows: 
(1)  On any street or highway except for emergency travel only during such time and in such manner as the State or local authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway shall designate, and except as provided in Section 375.04; 
(2)  Upon any property owned or leased by the Municipality except in areas designated for such purposes; 
(3)  On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area, without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to possession of the property; 
(4)  On any land or waters controlled by the State, except at those locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation; 
(5)  On tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad; 
(6)  While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting, that is not unloaded and securely encased; 
(7)  For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any animal or wild fowl; 
(8)  During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted lights as required by Section 375.02. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned not less than three nor more than thirty days, or both. 
(ORC 4519.40) 
Sec. 375.04. - Permitted operation. 
Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles may be operated as follows: 
(A)  To make a crossing of a highway, other than a freeway or limited access highway, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard; 
(B)  On highways in the County or Township road systems whenever the local authority having jurisdiction over such highway so permits; 
(C)  Off and alongside a street or highway for limited distances from the point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be operated. 
(D)  On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as designated in ORC 4519.40(A), when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane; 
(E)  On the berm or shoulder of a county or township road, while traveling from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle to another such area. 
(ORC 4519.41) 
Sec. 375.05. - Licensing requirements of operator. 
(A)  No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or probationary license issued under ORC Chapter 4506 or 4507, shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any street or highway, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any public land or waters. This subsection shall not be construed to permit the holder of such a license to operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle in violation of Section 375.03. 
(B)  No person who is less than sixteen years of age shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to such person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is eighteen years of age, or older, and who holds a license as provided in subsection (A) hereof, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on State controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than sixteen years of age but is twelve years of age or older and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed driver eighteen years of age or older. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned not less than three nor more than thirty days, or both. 
(ORC 4519.44) 
Sec. 375.06. - Registration of vehicles. 
(A)  Except as provided in ORC 4519.02(B), (C) and (D), no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with ORC 4519.03 and 4519.04. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A) of this section, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(ORC 4519.02) 
Sec. 375.07. - Accident reports. 
(A)  The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall report the accident within forty-eight hours to the Chief of Police, and, within thirty days, shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the event that there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports. 
Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by ORC 4519.42 and 4519.43, who investigates or receives information of an accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within forty-eight hours. 
(ORC 4519.46) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 375.08. - Certificate of title. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, if such a certificate is required by ORC Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership information relating to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas; 
(2)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled; 
(3)  Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in ORC Chapter 4519; 
(4)  Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of the court of common pleas as provided in ORC Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title; 
(5)  Violate any provision of ORC 4519.51 to 4519.70 or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those sections; 
(6)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. 
(ORC 4519.66) 
PART FIVE - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE 
  
CHAPTER 501. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; limitation of prosecution for income tax violations, ORC 718.06; modification of sentence, ORC 2929.10(C), (D); penalty considerations, ORC 2929.22; citation issuance for minor misdemeanors, ORC 2935.26 et seq. 

Sec. 501.01. - Definitions. 
As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
(A)  Force means any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any means upon or against a person or thing. 
(B)  Deadly force means any force that carries a substantial risk that it will proximately result in the death of any person. 
(C)  Physical harm to persons means any injury, illness or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
(D)  Physical harm to property means any tangible or intangible damage to property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or enjoyment. Physical harm to property does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use. 
(E)  Serious physical harm to persons means any of the following: 
(1)  Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment; 
(2)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(3)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(4)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(5)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
(F)  Serious physical harm to property means any physical harm to property that does either of the following: 
(1)  Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace; 
(2)  Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or substantially interferes with its use and enjoyment for an extended period of time. 
(G)  Risk means a significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
(H)  Substantial risk means a strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
(I)  Offense of violence means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of ORC 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, 2923.161, 2903.04(A)(1), 2911.12(A)(1) to (3) or 2919.22(B)(1) to (4), or felonious sexual penetration in violation of former ORC 2907.12; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (I)(1) hereof; 
(3)  An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, committed, purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under subsection (I)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(J)  (1)  Property means any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any interest or license in that property. Property includes, but is not limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by a trademark, copyright, or patent. Financial instruments associated with computers include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them. 
(2)  As used in this section, trade secret has the same meaning as in ORC 1333.61, and telecommunications service and information service have the same meanings as in ORC 2913.01. 
(3)  As used in this section, cable television service , computer , computer software , computer system , computer network , data , and telecommunications device have the same meanings as in ORC 2913.01. 
(K)  Law enforcement officer means any of the following: 
(1)  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township or joint township police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under ORC 3735.31(D) or State highway patrol trooper; 
(2)  An officer, agent or employee of the State or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, Charter or ordinance, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of that statutory duty and authority; 
(3)  A mayor or manager in the mayor's or manager's capacity as chief conservator of the peace within the mayor's or manager's municipal corporation; 
(4)  A member of an auxiliary police force organized by county, township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the member's appointment or commission; 
(5)  A person lawfully called pursuant to ORC 311.07 to aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is called; 
(6)  A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to ORC 737.01 as a special patrolling officer during riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the time when the person is appointed; 
(7)  A member of the organized militia of this State or the armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence; 
(8)  A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret service officer or municipal prosecutor; 
(9)  A veterans' home police officer appointed under ORC 5907.02; 
(10)  A member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority under ORC 306.35(Y); 
(11)  A special police officer employed by a port authority under ORC 4582.04 or 4582.28; 
(12)  The Senate Sergeant of Arms and or Assistant Sergeant at Arms; 
(13)  A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in Section 119.3 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security rules of the transportation security administration of the United States Department of Transportation as provided in Parts 1542 and 1544 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. 
(L)  Privilege means an immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or relationship, or growing out of necessity. 
(M)  Contraband means any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property's involvement in an offense. Contraband includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  Any controlled substance, as defined in ORC 3719.01, or any device, or paraphernalia; 
(2)  Any unlawful gambling device, or paraphernalia; 
(3)  Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material. 
(N)  A person is not guilty by reason of insanity relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the manner specified in ORC 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the offense, the person did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or defect, the wrongfulness of the person's acts. 
(O)  (1)  Person. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (O)(2) hereof, as used in any section contained in Part Five - General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense, person includes all of the following: 
i.  An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, and association; 
ii.  An unborn human who is viable. 
(b)  As used in any section contained in Part Five, General Offenses Code, that does not set forth a criminal offense, person includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and association. 
(c)  As used in subsection (O)(1)(a) hereof: 
i.  Unborn human means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization until live birth. 
ii.  Viable means the stage of development of a human fetus at which there is a realistic possibility of maintaining and nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (O)(1)(a) hereof, in no case shall the portion of the definition of the term person that is set forth in subsection (O)(1)(a)ii. hereof be applied or construed in any section contained in Part Five - General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the following manners: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (O)(2)(a) hereof, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of ORC 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21, or 2903.22, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence, but that does violate ORC 2919.12, division (B) of ORC 2919.13, or ORC 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, may be punished as a violation of ORC 2919.12, division (B) of ORC 2919.13, or ORC 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this subsection if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with ORC 2919.12. 
(b)  In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following: 
i.  Her delivery of a stillborn baby; 
ii.  Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying; 
iii.  Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable, unborn human; 
iv.  Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; 
v.  Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness or other physiological impairment, regardless of its duration or gravity, or a mental illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is carrying. 
(P)  School safety zone consists of a school, school building, school premises, school activity, and school bus. 
(Q)  School , school building and school premises have the same meaning as in ORC 2925.01. 
(R)  School activity means any activity held under the auspices of a board of education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community school established under ORC Ch. 3314; a governing body of an educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07. 
(S)  School bus has the same meaning as in ORC 4511.01. 
(ORC 2901.01) 
Sec. 501.02. - Classification of offenses. 
As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
(A)  Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified. 
(B)  Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor. 
(C)  Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty. 
(D)  Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following: 
(1)  For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(2)  For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service under division (D) of ORC 2929.27, or a financial sanction other than a fine under ORC 2929.28. 
(ORC 2901.02) 
Sec. 501.03. - Common law offenses abrogated. 
(A)  No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the Municipality unless it is defined as an offense in the Codified Ordinances or any other Municipal ordinance. 
(B)  An offense is defined when one or more sections of the Codified Ordinances state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty. 
(C)  This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil judgment or decree. 
(ORC 2901.03) 
Sec. 501.04. - Rules of construction. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C) hereof, sections of the Codified Ordinances defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed against the Municipality and liberally construed in favor of the accused. 
(B)  Rules of criminal procedure and sections of the Ohio Revised Code providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice. 
(C)  Any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code or of a division of a section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this State, another state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal ordinance. 
(D)  Any provision of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a section, or to a division of a section, of the Codified Ordinances that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this State, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense. 
(ORC 2901.04) 
Sec. 501.05. - Criminal law jurisdiction. 
(A)  A person is subject to misdemeanor prosecution and punishment in this Municipality if any of the following occur: 
(1)  The person commits an offense under the laws of this Municipality, any element of which takes place in this Municipality. 
(2)  While in this Municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this State and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this Municipality, the person conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this State and the other jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this Municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy, subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this subsection, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction. 
(3)  While out of this Municipality, the person conspires or attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this Municipality. 
(4)  While out of this Municipality, the person omits to perform a legal duty imposed by the laws of this Municipality, which omission affects a legitimate interest of the Municipality in protecting, governing or regulating any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this Municipality. 
(5)  While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or retained property into this Municipality. 
(6)  While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or entices another and subsequently brings the other person into this Municipality. 
(7)  The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data, image, or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this Municipality in violation of the law of this Municipality. 
(B)  This Municipality includes the land and water within its boundaries and the air space above such land and water, and real property outside the corporate limits, with respect to which this Municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction. Where the boundary between this Municipality and another jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this Municipality for purposes of this section. 
(C)  When an offense is committed under the laws of this Municipality, and it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the offense took place either in this Municipality or in another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place, the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this Municipality for purposes of this section. 
(D)  When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality for an offense committed or completed outside of this Municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this Municipality. 
(E)  Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person. 
(F)  This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with constitutional limitations, to allow this Municipality the broadest possible jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting, this Municipality. 
(G)  For purposes of subsection (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed. 
(H)  As used in this section, computer , computer system , computer network , information service , telecommunication , telecommunications device , telecommunications service , data , and writing have the same meaning as in ORC 2913.01. 
(ORC 2901.11) 
Sec. 501.06. - Limitation of criminal prosecution. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is committed: 
(1)  For misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years; 
(2)  For a minor misdemeanor, six months. 
(B)  If the period of limitation provided in subsection (A) hereof has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person, or by his legal representative who is not himself a party to the offense. 
(C)  (1)  If the period of limitation provided in this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the following offenses during the following specified periods of time: 
(a)  For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter; 
(b)  For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter. 
(2)  As used in this subsection: 
(a)  An offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant includes, but is not limited to, a violation of ORC 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, division (F) or (H) of ORC 102.03, division (A) of ORC 2921.02, division (A) or (B) of ORC 2921.43, or division (F) or (G) of ORC 3517.13, that is directly related to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant. 
(b)  Public servant has the same meaning as in Section 525.01. 
(D)  An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first. 
(E)  A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation or other process, unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same. 
(F)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus delicti remains undiscovered. 
(G)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused absented himself from this Municipality or concealed his identity or whereabouts is prima-facie evidence of his purpose to avoid prosecution. 
(H)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this State, even though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set aside or reversed on appeal. 
(I)  The period of limitation for a violation of any provision of this General Offenses Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury, disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect of a child under eighteen years of age or of a child with a developmental disability or physical impairment under twenty-one years of age shall not begin to run until either of the following occurs: 
(1)  The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority. 
(2)  A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to have occurred. 
(ORC 2901.13) 
(J)  This section shall not apply to prosecutions commenced within the period of limitations set forth in ORC 718.12(B) for violations of the Municipal income tax ordinance. 
Sec. 501.07. - Requirements for criminal liability. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, a person is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person's liability is based on conduct that includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is capable of performing; 
(2)  The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the offense. 
(B)  When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one subsection of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an offense defined in that subsection does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other subsections of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability. 
(C)  (1)  When language defining an element of an offense that is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts recklessly. 
(2)  Subsection (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined in the Traffic Code. 
(3)  Subsection (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition incorporated into the offense. 
(D)  Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor's control of the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession. 
(2)  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor's volition, are involuntary acts. 
(3)  Culpability means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as defined in Section 501.08. 
(4)  Intoxication includes, but is not limited to, intoxication resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug. 
(ORC 2901.21) 
Sec. 501.08. - Culpable mental states. 
(A)  A person acts purposely when it is the person's specific intention to cause a certain result, or when the gist of the offense is a prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender's specific intention to engage in conduct of that nature. 
(B)  A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is aware that the person's conduct will probably cause a certain result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. 
When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact. 
(C)  A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist. 
(D)  A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person's conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances may exist. 
(E)  When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. 
(ORC 2901.22) 
Sec. 501.09. - Attempt. 
(A)  No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be. 
(C)  No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense or of complicity in the commission of an offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in violation of this section. 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the actor abandoned the actor's effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an offense. An attempt to commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other misdemeanor is a misdemeanor of the next lesser degree than the misdemeanor attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of ORC Ch. 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony under the Ohio Revised Code, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor is not an offense under this section. 
(F)  As used in this section, drug abuse offense has the same meaning as in ORC 2925.01. 
(ORC 2923.02) 
Sec. 501.10. - Complicity. 
(A)  No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Solicit or procure another to commit the offense; 
(2)  Aid or abet another in committing the offense; 
(3)  Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender. 
(C)  No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Section 501.09. 
(D)  If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an offense or an offense, the court when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following: 
"The testimony of an accomplice does not become inadmissible because of his complicity, moral turpitude or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect his credibility and make his testimony subject to grave suspicion, and require that it be weighed with great caution. 
"It is for you, as jurors, in the light of all the facts presented to you from the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and worth or its lack of quality and worth." 
(E)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor terminated his complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense. 
(ORC 2923.03) 
Sec. 501.11. - Organizational criminal liability. 
(A)  An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply. 
(2)  A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply. 
(3)  The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty imposed by law on the organization. 
(4)  If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded, tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer; agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board's or person's office or employment. 
(B)  If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the contrary plainly appears. 
(C)  In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense. 
(D)  As used in this section, organization means a corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or legal entity. Organization does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program. 
(ORC 2901.23) 
Sec. 501.12. - Personal accountability for organizational conduct. 
(A)  An officer, agent or employee of an organization as defined in Section 501.11 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if he acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the offense, and any of the following apply: 
(1)  In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he has direct responsibility; 
(2)  He has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged. 
(B)  When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he is subject to the same penalty as if he had acted in his own behalf. 
(ORC 2901.24) 
Sec. 501.13. - Conspiracy. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to commit or to promote or facilitate the commission of aggravated murder, murder, kidnapping, abduction, compelling prostitution, promoting prostitution, trafficking in persons, aggravated arson, arson, aggravated robbery, robbery, aggravated burglary, burglary, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity, corrupting another with drugs, a felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, theft of drugs, or illegal processing of drug documents, the commission of a felony offense of unauthorized use of a vehicle, illegally transmitting multiple commercial electronic mail messages or unauthorized access of a computer in violation of ORC 2923.421 or the commission of a violation of any provision of ORC Ch. 3734, other than ORC 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  With another person or persons, plan or aid in planning the commission of any of the specified offenses; 
(2)  Agree with another person or persons that one or more of them will engage in conduct that facilitates the commission of any of the specified offenses. 
(B)  No person shall be convicted of conspiracy unless a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by the accused or a person with whom the accused conspired, subsequent to the accused's entrance into the conspiracy. For purposes of this section, an overt act is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed. 
(C)  When the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a person with whom the offender conspires also has conspired or is conspiring with another to commit the same offense, the offender is guilty of conspiring with that other person, even though the other person's identity may be unknown to the offender. 
(D)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the conspiracy was impossible under the circumstances. 
(E)  A conspiracy terminates when the offense or offenses that are its objects are committed or when it is abandoned by all conspirators. In the absence of abandonment, it is no defense to a charge under this section that no offense that was the object of the conspiracy was committed. 
(F)  A person who conspires to commit more than one offense is guilty of only one conspiracy, when the offenses are the object of the same agreement or continuous conspiratorial relationship. 
(G)  When a person is convicted of committing or attempting to commit a specific offense or of complicity in the commission of or attempt to commit the specific offense, the person shall not be convicted of conspiracy involving the same offense. 
(H)  (1)  No person shall be convicted of conspiracy upon the testimony of a person with whom the defendant conspired, unsupported by other evidence. 
(2)  If a person with whom the defendant allegedly has conspired testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with conspiracy and if the testimony is supported by other evidence, the court, when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following: 
"The testimony of an accomplice that is supported by other evidence does not become inadmissible because of the accomplice's complicity, moral turpitude, or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect the witness' credibility and make the witness' testimony subject to grave suspicion, and requires that it be weighed with great caution. 
It is for you, as jurors, in light of all the facts presented to you from the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and worth or its lack of quality and worth." 
(3)  Conspiracy , as used in subsection (H)(1) of this section, does not include any conspiracy that results in an attempt to commit an offense or in the commission of an offense. 
(I)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge of conspiracy: 
(1)  After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor thwarted the success of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(2)  After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor abandoned the conspiracy prior to the commission of or attempt to commit any offense that was the object of the conspiracy, either by advising all other conspirators of the actor's abandonment, or by informing any law enforcement authority of the existence of the conspiracy and of the actor's participation in the conspiracy. 
(J)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of conspiracy, which is a misdemeanor of the first degree, when the most serious offense that is the object of the conspiracy is a felony of the fifth degree. 
(K)  This section does not define a separate conspiracy offense or penalty where conspiracy is defined as an offense by one or more sections of this Code, other than this section. In such a case, however: 
(1)  With respect to the offense specified as the object of the conspiracy in the other section or sections, subsection (A) hereof defines the voluntary act or acts and culpable mental state necessary to constitute the conspiracy; 
(2)  Subsections (B)-(I) hereof are incorporated by reference in the conspiracy offense defined by the other section or sections of this Code. 
(L)  (1)  In addition to the penalties that otherwise are imposed for conspiracy, a person who is found guilty of conspiracy to engage in a pattern of corrupt activity is subject to divisions (B)(2) and (3) of ORC 2923.32, division (A) of ORC 2981.04 and division (D) of ORC 2981.06. 
(2)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to conspiracy and if the most serious offense that is the object of the conspiracy is a felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, in addition to the penalties or sanctions that may be imposed for the conspiracy under subsection (J) hereof and ORC Ch. 2929, both of the following apply: 
(a)  The provisions of divisions (D), (F) and (G) of ORC 2925.03, division (D) of ORC 2925.04, division (D) of ORC 2925.05, division (D) of ORC 2925.06 and division (E) of ORC 2925.11 that pertain to mandatory and additional fines, driver's or commercial driver's license or permit suspensions, and professionally licensed persons and that would apply under the appropriate provisions of those divisions to a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing, or possession offense that is the most serious offense that is the basis of the conspiracy shall apply to the person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the conspiracy as if the person had been convicted or pleaded guilty to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense that is the most serious offense that is the basis of the conspiracy. 
(b)  The court that imposes sentence upon the person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the conspiracy shall comply with the provisions identified as being applicable under subsection (L)(2) of this section, in addition to any other penalty or sanction that it imposes for the conspiracy under subsection (J) of this section and ORC Ch. 2929. 
(M)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense means any of the following that is a felony: 
(a)  A violation of ORC 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.05, or 2925.06; 
(b)  A violation of ORC 2925.11 that is not a minor drug possession offense. 
(2)  Minor drug possession offense has the same meaning as in ORC 2925.01. 
(ORC 2923.01) 
Sec. 501.99. - Penalties for misdemeanors. 
(A)  Financial Sanctions. In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to ORC 2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor committed under the Codified Ordinances, including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this section. If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Restitution. Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this section if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. 
If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim. 
If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from the offender. 
All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under ORC 3937.18. 
If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than five per cent of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments. 
The victim or survivor may request that the prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate. 
(2)  Fines. A fine in the following amount: 
(a)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(b)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); 
(c)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(d)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
(e)  For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(3)  Reimbursement of costs of sanctions. 
(a)  Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  All or part of the costs of implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee under ORC 2951.021; 
ii.  All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined. 
(b)  The amount of reimbursement ordered under subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that subsection. If the court does not order reimbursement under that subsection, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under ORC 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees specified in ORC 2929.38 in accordance with that section. 
(ORC 2929.28) 
(B)  Jail Terms. 
(1)  Except as provided in ORC 2929.22 or 2929.23 of the Revised Code, and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this General Offenses Code, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the following: 
(a)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one hundred eighty days; 
(b)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than ninety days; 
(c)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than sixty days; 
(d)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than thirty days. 
(2)  (a)  A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this section may permit the offender to serve the sentenced in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in ORC 2929.26(B). The court retains jurisdiction over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term. 
(b)  i.  If a prosecutor, as defined in ORC 2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of the hearing. 
ii.  If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the offender from the offender's jail sentence. 
(3)  If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to ORC 5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the offender's participation in the county jail industry program. 
(4)  If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to ORC 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to ORC 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and ORC 2929.37, both of the following apply: 
(a)  The court shall specify both of the following as part of the sentence: 
i.  If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to ORC 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section. 
ii.  If the person does not dispute the bill described in subsection (B)(4)(a)i. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in ORC 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section. 
(b)  The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment issued as described in subsection (B)(4)(a)ii. of this section. 
(ORC 2929.24) 
(C)  Organizations. Regardless of the penalties provided in subsections (A) and (B) hereof, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section 501.11 shall be fined, in accordance with this section. The court shall fix the fine as follows: 
Type of Misdemeanor Maximum Fine First degree $5000.00 Second degree 4000.00 Third degree 3000.00 Fourth degree 2000.00 Minor 1000.00 Misdemeanor not specifically classified 2000.00 Minor misdemeanor not specifically classified 1000.00  
(1)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this subsection (C). 
(2)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than the fine that is provided in this subsection (C), then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section defining the offense. 
(3)  This subsection (C) does not prevent the imposition of available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section 501.11, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this subsection (C). 
(ORC 2929.31) 
CHAPTER 505. - ANIMALS AND FOWL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; owner or keeper liable for damages, ORC 951.10; dog registration, ORC 955.01. 

Sec. 505.001. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter unless otherwise specifically provided herein: 
(A)  (1)  Dangerous dog means a dog that, without provocation, and subject to subsection (A)(2) hereof has done any of the following: 
(a)  Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person; 
(b)  Killed another dog; 
(c)  Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of Section 505.01(C). 
(2)  Dangerous dog does not include a police dog that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(B)  Menacing fashion means that a dog would cause any person being chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to that person. 
(C)  (1)  Subject to subsection (C)(2) hereof, nuisance dog means a dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person. 
(2)  Nuisance dog does not include a police dog that while being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of official duties has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person. 
(D)  Police dog means a dog that has been trained, and may be used, to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(E)  Serious injury means any of the following: 
(1)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(2)  Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(3)  Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(4)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
(F)  (1)  Vicious dog means a dog that, without provocation and subject to subsection (F)(2) hereof has killed or caused serious injury to any person. 
(2)  Vicious dog does not include either of the following: 
(a)  A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties; 
(b)  A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog. 
(G)  Without provocation means that a dog was not teased, tormented or abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to the aid or the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity. 
(ORC 955.11) 
Sec. 505.01. - Dogs and other animals running at large. 
(A)  No person being the owner or having charge of cattle, horses, swine, sheep, geese, ducks, goats, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals shall permit them to run at large upon any public place, or upon any unenclosed lands or upon the premises of another. 
(ORC 951.02) 
(B)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in heat, unless the dog is properly in leash. 
(C)  No owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following: 
(1)  Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape. 
(2)  Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person. 
(ORC 955.22) 
(D)  The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places mentioned in this section is prima-facie evidence that it is running at large in violation of this section. 
(ORC 951.02) 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 951.99) 
(2)  (a)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsection (E)(2)(a) hereof, if the offender is guilty of a violation of subsection (B) hereof, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both. 
(3)  (a)  Non-nuisance Dog Violations. 
i.  Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof that involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
ii.  In addition to the penalties prescribed above, if the offender is guilty of a violation of subsection (C) hereof, that involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both. 
(b)  i.  Whoever commits a violation of subsection (C) hereof, that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading guilty to a third violation of subsection (C) hereof, involving the same dog, the court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as a dangerous dog. 
ii.  In addition to the penalties prescribed above, if a violation of subsection (C) hereof involves a nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete obedience training, or to do both. 
(c)  Whoever commits a violation of subsection (C) hereof that involves a dangerous dog, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to division (E) of ORC 955.22. The court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society at the owner's expense. With respect to a violation of subsection (C) hereof that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that division and at the discretion of the Dog Warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with division (D) of ORC 955.22 or at the County Dog Pound at the owner's expense. 
(d)  i.  Whoever commits a violation of subsection (C) hereof that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one or the following: 
a.  A felony, if the dog kills a person, and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. Additionally, the court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden or the County Humane Society at the owner's expense. 
b.  A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society; 
ii.  If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed under subsection (E)(3)(d)i.b. hereof, the court shall issue an order that specifies that division (D) of ORC 955.11 and divisions (D) to (I) of ORC 955.22 apply with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog and that ORC 955.54 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the court shall order the offender to obtain the liability insurance required under division (E)(1) of ORC 955.22 in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of subsection (C) hereof and at the discretion of the Dog Warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions described in division (D) of ORC 955.22 or at the County Dog Pound at the owner's expense. 
(ORC 955.99) 
Sec. 505.02. - Impounding and disposition; records. 
(A)  A police officer or animal warden may impound every animal or dog found in violation of Section 505.01. If the dog is not wearing a valid registration tag and the owner is not otherwise reasonably determined, notice shall be posted in the pound or animal shelter both describing the dog and place where seized and advising the unknown owner that unless the dog is redeemed within three days, it may thereafter be sold or destroyed according to law. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or the identity of the owner, keeper or harborer is otherwise reasonably determined, notice shall be given by certified mail to such owner, keeper or harborer that the dog has been impounded and unless redeemed within fourteen days of the date of notice, it may thereafter be sold or destroyed according to law. Any dog seized and impounded may be redeemed by its owner, keeper or harborer at any time prior to the applicable redemption period upon payment of all lawful costs assessed against the animal and upon providing the dog with a valid registration tag if it has none. 
(B)  A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the owner's name and address where known, and a statement of any costs assessed against the dog shall be kept by any poundkeeper. 
Sec. 505.03. - Annual registration of dogs; tags required. 
(A)  Except for guide dogs registered under ORC 955.011 and dogs kept by an institution or organization for teaching and research purposes under ORC 955.16, no person shall own, keep or harbor a dog more than three months of age without annually registering such dog with the County Auditor. Failure of any dog at any time to wear a valid registration tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and subject such dog to impounding and disposition as provided by ORC 955.16. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
(ORC 955.99(D)). 
Sec. 505.04. - Abandoning animals. 
(A)  No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall abandon such animal. 
(ORC 959.01) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense. 
(ORC 959.99) 
Sec. 505.05. - Killing or injuring animals. 
(A)  No person shall maliciously, or willfully, and without the consent of the owner, kill or injure a farm animal, dog, cat or other domestic animal that is the property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an official capacity, or to trespassing animals as set forth in ORC 959.04. 
(ORC 959.02) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section, if the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree; if the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 959.99(B)) 
Sec. 505.06. - Poisoning animals. 
(A)  No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such capacity, to a farm animal, dog, cat, poultry or other domestic animal that is the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner, place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any of such animals, either upon his own lands or the lands of another. This section does not apply to trespassing animals as set forth in ORC 959.04. 
(ORC 959.03) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 959.99(C)) 
Sec. 505.07. - Cruelty to animals generally. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or confine an animal without supplying it during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water; 
(2)  Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during such confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer. This subsection (A)(2) does not apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this section, shelter means a man-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree development or vegetation; 
(3)  Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner; 
(4)  Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk; 
(5)  Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than twenty-eight hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food, water and attention, nor permit such livestock to be so crowded as to overlie, crush, wound or kill each other. 
(B)  Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of time in which such livestock may be detained in any cars or compartments without food, water and attention, may be extended to thirty-six hours without penalty therefor. This section does not prevent the dehorning of cattle. 
(ORC 959.13) 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this subsection, the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal. 
(ORC 959.99(D)) 
Sec. 505.071. - Cruelty to companion animals. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Companion animal means any animal that is kept inside a residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet store as defined in ORC 956.01. Companion animal does not include livestock or any wild animal. 
(2)  Cruelty , torment and torture have the same meanings as in ORC 1717.01. 
(3)  Residential dwelling means a structure or shelter or the portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a habitation. 
(4)  Practice of veterinary medicine has the same meaning as in ORC 4741.01. 
(5)  Wild animal has the same meaning as in ORC 1531.01. 
(6)  Federal animal welfare act means the "Laboratory Animal Act of 1966", Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C.A. 2131 et seq., as amended by the "Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the "Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417 (1976), and the "Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended. 
(7)  Dog kennel means an animal rescue for dogs that is registered under ORC 956.06, a boarding kennel or a training kennel. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against a companion animal. 
(C)  No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Torture, torment or commit an act or cruelty against the companion animal; 
(2)  Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement; 
(3)  Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter. 
(D)  No owner, manager or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion animal; 
(2)  Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement; 
(3)  Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter. 
(E)  Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related regulations; 
(2)  The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so under ORC Ch. 4741; 
(3)  Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs; 
(4)  The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the training of animals; 
(5)  The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate under ORC Ch. 4741. 
(ORC 959.131) 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  (a)  A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section to forfeit to an impounding agency, as defined in ORC 959.132, any or all of the companion animals in that person's ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or place limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any companion animals for a specified or indefinite period of time. 
(b)  A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not otherwise paid under ORC 959.132. 
(5)  If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling. (ORC 959.99) 
Sec. 505.08. - Nuisance conditions prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the Municipality so as to create noxious, or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 505.09. - Barking or howling dogs. 
(A)  No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Municipality which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the Municipality. Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which he occupies or owns, shall be considered as harboring such dog. 
(B)  On complaint made to the police of a dog owned or kept in the City, which by barking, biting, howling or in any way or manner disturbing the peace or quiet of any person, the police shall issue a notice of such complaint to the person owning, keeping or permitting such dog to be kept. No person so notified shall neglect to cause such dog to be forthwith placed under such control as will promote such peace and quiet. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 785-67. Passed 11-30-1967.) 
Sec. 505.10. - Animal bites; reports and quarantine. 
(A)  Whenever any person is bitten by a dog or other animal, report of such bite shall be made to the Health Commissioner within twenty-four hours. Whenever it is reported to the Health Commissioner that any dog or cat has bitten a person, that dog or cat shall be quarantined under an order issued by the Health Commissioner. The dog or cat shall be quarantined by its owner or by a harborer, or shall be quarantined in a pound or kennel. In all cases, such quarantine shall be under the supervision of the Health Commissioner and shall be at the expense of the owner or harborer. Quarantine shall continue until the Health Commissioner determines that the dog or cat is not afflicted with rabies. The quarantine period hereby required shall not be less than ten days from the date on which the person was bitten. If at any time during the quarantine, the Health Commissioner requires the dog or cat to be examined for symptoms of rabies, then the examination shall be by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine. The veterinarian shall report to the Health Commissioner the conclusions reached as a result of the examinations. The examination by a veterinarian shall be at the expense of the owner or harborer. No dog or cat shall be released from the required quarantine unless and until it has been properly vaccinated against rabies. 
No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section or with any order of the Health Commissioner made pursuant thereto, nor fail to immediately report to the Health Commissioner any symptoms or behavior suggestive of rabies. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 505.11. - Hunting prohibited. 
(A)  Recreational hunting is prohibited in the City of Marysville. However, wildlife populations that present a danger or nuisance to persons or property may be controlled by hunting in certain areas of the City of Marysville provided the following criteria are satisfactorily met: 
(1)  On a case by case basis, the Chief of Police will approve or disapprove intended wildlife hunting sites within the City's designated discharge zones, as established by the Mayor. The Mayor may also specify designated discharge zones to be no fire zones, where firearms may not be used under any circumstance. Biannually, the Mayor and/or his agent will reevaluate and make any necessary changes to the designated discharge zones and no fire zones. 
(2)  The person(s) involved in the hunting of wildlife is/are properly licensed pursuant to the current rules and regulations of the Ohio Division of Wildlife. 
(3)  There will be no hunting of a particular species of wildlife in the designated discharge zones during the designated hunting season for that particular species of wildlife as established by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources. 
(4)  The written permission of the landowner is on file with the Chief of Police, City of Marysville. Such written permission must be dated and shall expire one year from the date of its issuance. 
(5)  The person(s) involved in the hunting of wildlife must obey all applicable State and Federal hunting laws. 
(6)  If the Chief of Police approves an application to allow hunting on an intended wildlife site, the Chief will issue to the applicant a permit good for no more than one year from the date of issuance. 
(7)  The Landowner and the City have a Waiver of Liability on file from the person(s) engaged in wildlife hunting, identify the properly permitted person(s) engaged in the hunting as being solely responsible for any injuries or property damages. 
(8)  A $20.00 administration fee is due with the filing of the application to cover the costs of issuing and maintaining Controlled Wildlife Hunting Permits. Said administration fee is payable to the Marysville Police Department. However, the administration fee will be waived for landowners applying to hunt on intended wildlife sites to which they have proper title. 
(9)  The applicant must be eighteen years of age or older. 
(10)  Every individual who plans to hunt under the provisions of this chapter shall call the Marysville Police Department immediately prior to beginning his/her hunt and immediately upon leaving the designated discharge zone. 
(11)  The use of rifles shall not be permitted. 
(12)  No more than five hunters will be allowed on any one wildlife hunting site at the same time. 
(B)  Upon completion of these requirements, a Controlled Wildlife Hunting Permit may be applied for with the Marysville Chief of Police. The Controlled Wildlife Hunting Permit Application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, phone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Valid Ohio hunting license and/or wildlife damage or nuisance wildlife permit number(s) issued by the Ohio Division of Wildlife. 
(3)  Wildlife species being hunted. 
(4)  Method of hunting (gun, archery, trapping). If necessary, specify the shot size. 
(5)  Landowner or property manager - name, address, phone number. 
(6)  Period of time requested for the permit (concurrent with division of wildlife regulated seasons and/or any Division of Wildlife - issued wildlife damage and nuisance permits issued outside of regulated seasons - with listed restrictions, if any). 
(7)  Waiver of liability. 
(C)  The Marysville Chief of Police must respond within ten business days to the applicant with either an approval or denial. If approved, the Chief of Police shall send a copy of the permit to the Union County Sheriff's Office and the Union County Wildlife Officer. 
(D)  No one other than the lawful permit holder may hunt on an intended wildlife hunting site. 
(E)  Upon issuance of the permit, the person(s) engaged in the hunting of wildlife within the City limits must carry his or her permit on his or her person while in pursuit of wildlife and produce the document to any Law Enforcement Official upon request. 
(F)  The permit may be revoked by any Landowner or Property Manager or Law Enforcement Official at any time and no refund will be provided to the permit holder. 
(G)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 53-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 505.12. - Coloring rabbits or baby poultry; sale or display of poultry. 
(A)  No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry, including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or poultry which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less than s9. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times. 
(ORC 925.62) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 505.13. - Dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes. 
(A)  For purposes of this section, dangerous wild animal and restricted snake have the same meanings as set forth in ORC 935.01. 
(B)  (1)  Except for a restricted snake specified in ORC 935.01(L)(1), no person shall sell or offer for sale at auction a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake. 
(2)  Except for a microchip removed for purposes of a medical emergency by a veterinarian that is qualified to provide veterinary care to the dangerous wild animal, no person shall knowingly remove a microchip that is implanted in a dangerous wild animal as required in ORC 935.04. 
(3)  No person that possesses a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake shall fail to post and display any of the following: 
(a)  On each cage in which a dangerous wild animal is confined, signs warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is confined in the cage; 
(b)  At each entrance to the property where a dangerous wild animal is confined, a sign warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is on the property; 
(c)  On each container in which a restricted snake is confined, a sign warning the public that a restricted snake is in the container; 
(d)  At the main entrance to each structure where a restricted snake is confined, a sign warning the public that a restricted snake is in the structure; 
(e)  On a vehicle that is used to transport a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, a sign warning that a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, as applicable, is in the vehicle. 
The signs shall comply with standards established in rules adopted by the State Director of Agriculture. 
(4)  No person shall allow a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake to roam off the property where it is confined. 
(5)  No person shall remove any teeth or claws from a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, as applicable, unless determined to be medically necessary by a veterinarian. 
(ORC 935.18) 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense. On a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 935.99) 
Sec. 505.14. - Dangerous dogs. 
(A)  Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do either of the following: 
(1)  While that dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, securely confine it at all times in a building, in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
(2)  While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following: 
(a)  Keep that dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
(b)  Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the ground or stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; 
(c)  Muzzle that dog. 
(B)  No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the following: 
(1)  Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this State providing coverage in each occurrence because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, County Dog Warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section; 
(2)  Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County Auditor pursuant to ORC 955.22(I), affix a tag that identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog's collar, and ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times; 
(3)  Notify the local Dog Warden immediately if any of the following occurs: 
(a)  The dog is loose or unconfined. 
(b)  The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property. 
(c)  The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property of the owner of the dog. 
(4)  If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer or death. 
(ORC 955.22) 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to subsection (B) hereof. The court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the Dog Warden or the humane society at the owner's expense. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B)(2) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsections (B)(1), (3) or (4) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 955.99) 
Sec. 505.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 509. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND PEACE DISTURBANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Criminal trespass,  541.05. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; use of force to suppress riot, ORC 2917.05; cordoning off riot areas, prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, ORC 3761.16; emergency suspension of permits and sales by Director of Liquor Control, ORC 4301.251. 

Sec. 509.01. - Riot. 
(A)  No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of Section 509.03: 
(1)  With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct; 
(2)  With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct a function of government; 
(3)  With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such institution. 
(B)  No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might otherwise be lawful. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2917.03) 
Sec. 509.011. - Inciting to violence. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite another to commit any offense of violence, when either of the following apply: 
(1)  The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and present danger that any offense of violence will be committed; 
(2)  The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of violence. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2917.01) 
Sec. 509.02. - Failure to disperse. 
(A)  Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of Section 509.03, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public official may order the participants and such other persons to disperse. No person shall knowingly fail to obey such order. 
(B)  Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3) hereof, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the failure to obey the order described in subsection (A) hereof, creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
(ORC 2917.04) 
Sec. 509.03. - Disorderly conduct; intoxication. 
(A)  No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to another by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property, or in violent or turbulent behavior; 
(2)  Making unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person, which by its very utterance or usage inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(3)  Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response; 
(4)  Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street, road, highway or right of way, or to, from, within or upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; 
(5)  Creating a condition which is physically offensive to persons or which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender. 
(B)  No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the following: 
(1)  In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on others; 
(2)  Engage in conduct or create a condition which presents a risk of physical harm to himself or another, or to the property of another. 
(C)  Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation of subsection (B) hereof. 
(D)  If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is probable cause to believe that person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes of subsection (B) hereof. 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (E)(3), disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of the following applies: 
(a)  The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist. 
(b)  The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a school safety zone. 
(c)  The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind. 
(d)  The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of emergency medical services personnel as defined in ORC 2133.21. 
(2)  Emergency facility person is the singular of emergency facility personnel as defined in ORC 2909.04. 
(3)  Emergency facility has the same meaning as in ORC 2909.04. 
(4)  Committed in the vicinity of a school has the same meaning as in ORC 2925.01. 
(ORC 2917.11) 
Sec. 509.04. - Disturbing a lawful meeting. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of such meeting, procession or gathering; 
(2)  Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the sensibilities of the group. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 2917.12) 
Sec. 509.05. - Misconduct at an emergency. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or other authorized person, engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind; 
(2)  Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility; 
(3)  Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
(B)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news media representative's duties. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of emergency medical services personnel as defined in ORC 2133.21. 
(2)  Emergency facility person is the singular of emergency facility personnel as defined in ORC 2909.04. 
(3)  Emergency facility has the same meaning as in ORC 2909.04. 
(ORC 2917.13) 
Sec. 509.06. - Inducing panic. 
(A)  No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that such report or warning is false; 
(2)  Threatening to commit any offense of violence; 
(3)  Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm. 
(B)  Division (A) hereof does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If inducing panic results in physical harm to any person, economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, if the public place involved in a violation of this section is a school or an institution of higher education, or if the violation pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Economic harm means any of the following: 
(a)  All direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct. Economic harm as described in this division includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
i.  All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct; 
ii.  The cost of all wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct; 
iii.  The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; 
iv.  The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct. 
(b)  All costs incurred by the Municipality as a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted the violation of this section or Section 509.07, including, but not limited to, all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision. 
(2)  School means any school operated by a board of education or any school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of this section is committed. 
(3)  Weapon of mass destruction means any of the following: 
(a)  Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their precursors; 
(b)  Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent; 
(c)  Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life; 
(d)  Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of destructive device pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that section: 
i.  Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar device; 
ii.  Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division (E)(3)(d)i. of this section and from which an item or device described in that division may be readily assembled. 
(4)  Biological agent has the same meaning as in ORC 2917.33. 
(5)  Emergency medical services personnel has the same meaning as in ORC 2133.21. 
(6)  Institution of higher education means any of the following: 
(a)  A state university or college as defined in ORC 3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or technical college; 
(b)  A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary institution located in this State that possesses a certificate of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to ORC Ch. 1713. 
(c)  A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools under ORC Ch. 3332. 
(ORC 2917.31) 
Sec. 509.07. - Making false alarms. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm; 
(2)  Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other incident within its concern, knowing that such offense did not occur. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections. 
(E)  As used in this section, economic harm and weapon of mass destruction have the same meanings as in Section 509.06. 
(ORC 2917.32) 
Sec. 509.08. - Curfew. 
(A)  Hours for Minors under Twelve. No minor under the age of twelve years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places during the period from darkness to dawn; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care of and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(B)  Hours for Minors under Eighteen. No minor under the age of eighteen years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. of the following day, official Municipal time; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care of and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(Ord. 759. Passed 5-12-1966.) 
(C)  The parent, guardian or person having legal custody and control of any minor, who permits such minor to violate this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 509.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 513. - DRUG ABUSE CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Adulterating food with drug of abuse,  537.13; using weapons while under the influence,  549.03. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; federal prosecution bar to local prosecution, ORC 2925.50, 3719.19; analysis report and notarized statement as evidence, ORC 2925.51; criteria for granting probation, ORC 3719.70(B). 

Sec. 513.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
(A)  Administer means the direct application of a drug, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion or any other means to a person or an animal. 
(B)  Controlled substance means a drug, compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V. 
(C)  Dispense means sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver. 
(D)  Distribute means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver but does not include administering or dispensing a drug. 
(E)  Hypodermic means a hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or device for the injection of medication. 
(F)  Manufacturer means a person who manufactures a controlled substance as manufacture is defined in ORC 3715.01. 
(G)  Except as provided in subsection (G)(2) hereof: 
(1)  Marihuana means all parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. Marihuana does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. 
(ORC 3719.01) 
(2)  Marihuana does not include hashish. 
(ORC 2925.01) 
(H)  Controlled substance analog has the same meaning as provided in ORC 3719.01. 
(I)  Official written order means an order written on a form provided for that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision for the order, if the order forms are authorized and required by Federal law. 
(J)  Pharmacist means a person licensed under ORC Ch. 4729 to engage in the practice of pharmacy. 
(K)  Pharmacy has the same meaning as in ORC 4729.01. 
(L)  Poison means any drug, chemical, or preparation likely to be deleterious or destructive to adult human life in quantities of four grams or less. 
(M)  Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs , prescriber and prescription have the same meanings as in ORC 4729.01. 
(N)  Sale includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer or gift, or offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
(O)  Schedule I , Schedule II , Schedule III , Schedule IV and Schedule V mean controlled substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V respectively, established pursuant to ORC 3719.41, as amended pursuant to ORC 3719.43 or 3719.44. 
(P)  Wholesaler means a person who, on official written orders other than prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes a wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs as defined in ORC 4729.01. 
(ORC 3719.01) 
(Q)  Drug of abuse means any controlled substance as defined in subsection (B) hereof, any harmful intoxicant as defined in subsection (X) hereof and any dangerous drug as defined in subsection (R) hereof. 
(ORC 3719.011) 
(R)  Dangerous drug means any of the following: 
(1)  Any drug to which either of the following applies: 
(a)  Under the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act", 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, the drug is required to bear a label containing the legend "Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without prescription" or "Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian" or any similar restrictive statement, or the drug may be dispensed only upon a prescription; 
(b)  Under ORC Ch. 3715 or 3719, the drug may be dispensed only upon a prescription. 
(2)  Any drug that contains a Schedule V narcotic drug and that is exempt from ORC Ch. 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply; 
(3)  Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human body other than through a natural orifice of the human body. 
(ORC 4729.02) 
(S)  Bulk amount of a controlled substance means any of the following: 
(1)  For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of controlled substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, and hashish and except as provided in subsection (S)(2) or (5) hereof, whichever of the following is applicable: 
(a)  An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or twenty-five unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative; 
(b)  An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium; 
(c)  An amount equal to or exceeding thirty grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol, or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant; 
(d)  An amount equal to or exceeding twenty grams or five times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium derivative; 
(e)  An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of phencyclidine; 
(f)  An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or thirty times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws as defined in ORC 3719.01, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance; 
(g)  An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws; 
(2)  An amount equal to or exceeding one hundred twenty grams or thirty times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative; 
(3)  An amount equal to or exceeding twenty grams or five times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative; 
(4)  An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule V substance; 
(5)  An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, sixteen grams or sixteen milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid. 
(T)  Unit dose means an amount or unit of a compound, mixture or preparation containing a controlled substance, that is separately identifiable and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual. 
(U)  Cultivate includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling. 
(V)  Drug abuse offense means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of ORC. 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04 to 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37; or a violation of ORC 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former law of this or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (V)(1) hereof; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former law of this or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing or attempting to commit any offense under subsection (V)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(W)  Felony drug abuse offense means any drug abuse offense that would constitute a felony under the laws of this State, any other state or the United States. 
(X)  Harmful intoxicant does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means any of the following: 
(1)  Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(a)  Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent; 
(b)  Any aerosol propellant; 
(c)  Any fluorocarbon refrigerant; 
(d)  Any anesthetic gas. 
(2)  Gamma Butyrolactone; 
(3)  1,4 Butanediol. 
(Y)  Manufacture means to plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug by propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to production. 
(Z)  Possess or possession means having control over a thing or substance but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found. 
(AA)  Sample drug means a drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a manufacturer. 
(BB)  Standard pharmaceutical reference manual means the current edition, with cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board of Pharmacy. 
(CC)  Juvenile means a person under eighteen years of age. 
(DD)  School means any school operated by a board of education or any school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
(EE)  School premises means either of the following: 
(1)  The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense is committed; 
(2)  Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a school or the governing body of a school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
(FF)  School building means any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
(GG)  Counterfeit controlled substance means: 
(1)  Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of the owner of rights to that trademark, trade name or identifying mark; 
(2)  Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it; 
(3)  Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance; or 
(4)  Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in shape, size and color, or its marking, labeling, packaging, distribution or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale. 
(HH)  An offense is committed in the vicinity of a school if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or within one thousand feet of the boundaries of any school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being committed on school premises, in a school building, or within one thousand feet of the boundaries of any school premises. 
(II)  An offense is committed in the vicinity of a juvenile if the offender commits the offense within one hundred feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being committed within one hundred feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense. 
(JJ)  Hashish means the resin or a preparation of the resin contained in marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form. 
(KK)  Public premises means any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort. 
(LL)  Methamphetamine means methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine. 
(MM)  Lawful prescription means a prescription that is issued for a legitimate medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of deception or by the commission of any theft offense. 
(NN)  Deception and theft offense have the same meanings as in ORC 2913.01. 
(ORC 2925.01) 
Sec. 513.02. - Gift of marihuana. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly give or offer to make a gift of twenty grams or less of marihuana. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of trafficking in marihuana. Trafficking in marihuana is a minor misdemeanor for the first offense and, for any subsequent offense, it is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(C)  The court may by order suspend for not more than five years the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to any violation of this section. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit in accordance with ORC 2925.03(G). If an offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit is suspended pursuant to this subsection, the offender, at any time after the expiration of two years from the day on which the offender's sentence was imposed, may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting termination of the suspension; upon the filing of such a motion and the court's finding of good cause for the termination, the court may terminate the suspension. 
(ORC 2925.03) 
Sec. 513.03. - Drug abuse; controlled substance possession or use. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog. 
(B)  (1)  This section does not apply to the following: 
(a)  Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with ORC Chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. 
(b)  If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; 
(c)  Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act", 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act; 
(d)  Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(2)  (a)  As used in subsection (B)(2) of this section: 
i.  Community addiction services provider has the same meaning as in ORC 5119.01. 
ii.  Community control sanction and drug treatment program have the same meanings as in ORC 2929.01. 
iii.  Health care facility has the same meaning as in ORC 2919.16. 
iv.  Minor drug possession offense means a violation of this section that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree. 
v.  Post-release control sanction has the same meaning as in ORC 2967.28. 
vi.  Peace officer has the same meaning as in ORC 2935.01. 
vii.  Public agency has the same meaning as in ORC 2930.01. 
viii.  Qualified individual means a person who is not on community control or post-release control and is a person acting in good faith who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. 
ix.  Seek or obtain medical assistance includes, but is not limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section, a qualified individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted or penalized pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all of the following apply: 
i.  The evidence of the obtaining, possession or use of the controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance. 
ii.  Subject to subsection (B)(2)(g) of this section, within thirty days after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction treatment professional. 
iii.  Subject to subsection (B)(2)(g) of this section, the qualified individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under subsection (B)(2)(b)i. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that subsection. The documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained and referral received. 
(c)  If a person is found to be in violation of any community control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court shall first consider ordering the person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified in ORC 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, whichever is applicable, after which the court has the discretion either to order the person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified in any of those applicable sections: 
i.  Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose; 
ii.  Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance for that overdose or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. 
(d)  If a person is found to be in violation of any post-release control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering the person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified in ORC 2929.141 or 2967.28, whichever is applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the discretion either to order the person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified in either of those applicable sections: 
i.  Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose; 
ii.  Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance for that emergency or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. 
(e)  Nothing in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed to do any of the following: 
i.  Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does not qualify for the protections of subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section or with regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense committed by a person who qualifies for protection pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section for a minor drug possession offense; 
ii.  Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise permitted by law; 
iii.  Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division; 
iv.  Limit, modify or remove any immunity from liability available pursuant to law in effect prior to the effective date of this amendment to any public agency or to an employee of any public agency. 
(f)  Subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person who twice previously has been granted an immunity under subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section more than two times. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the requirements of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq., as amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part 2. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of one of the following: 
(1)  If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of possession of drugs. Possession of drugs is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the bulk amount. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of possession of marihuana. Possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed 200 grams. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2)(b) hereof, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of possession of hashish. Possession of hashish is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the maximum amount specified in subsection (C)(3)(b) hereof. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3)(b) hereof, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction that is imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(E)  Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person's appearance as a witness. 
(ORC 2925.11) 
Sec. 513.04. - Possessing drug abuse instruments. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument, article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use. 
(B)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with ORC Chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(ORC 2925.12) 
Sec. 513.05. - Permitting drug abuse. 
(A)  No person, who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle as defined in ORC 4501.01(A), shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense. 
(B)  No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody, control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land, shall knowingly permit the premises, or real estate, including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another person. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the felony drug abuse offense in question is a violation of ORC 2925.02 or 2925.03, permitting drug abuse is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(E)  Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation of subsection (B) hereof constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to ORC Ch. 3767. 
(ORC 2925.13) 
Sec. 513.06. - Illegal cultivation of marihuana. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any person listed in ORC 2925.03(B)(1)-(3) to the extent and under the circumstances described in those divisions. 
(C)  Whoever commits a violation of subsection (A) hereof is guilty of illegal cultivation of marihuana. Illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of marihuana involved does not exceed 200 grams. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) hereof, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor, or if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit in accordance with division (G) of ORC 2925.03. If an offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit is suspended in accordance with that division, the offender may request termination of, and the court may terminate, the suspension in accordance with that division. 
(E)  Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in an application for employment, a license, or any other right or privilege or made in connection with the person's appearance as a witness. 
(ORC 2925.04) 
Sec. 513.07. - Possessing or using harmful intoxicants. 
(A)  Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(C)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(ORC 2925.31) 
Sec. 513.08. - Illegally dispensing drug samples. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly furnish another a sample drug. 
(B)  Subsection (A) hereof does not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with ORC Chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of drug samples. If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) hereof, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(2)  If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(ORC 2925.36) 
Sec. 513.09. - Controlled substance or prescription labels. 
(A)  As used in this section, repackager and outsourcing facility have the same meanings as in ORC 4729.01. 
Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in a package the wholesaler, repackager or outsourcing facility has prepared, the manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager or outsourcing facility, as the case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface or remove any label so affixed. 
(B)  Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, when a pharmacist dispenses any controlled substance on a prescription for use by a patient, or supplies a controlled substance to a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs for use by the professional in personally furnishing patients with controlled substances, the pharmacist shall affix to the container in which the controlled substance is dispensed or supplied a label showing the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the pharmacy dispensing or supplying the controlled substance; 
(2)  The name of the patient for whom the controlled substance is prescribed and, if the patient is an animal, the name of the owner and the species of the animal; 
(3)  The name of the prescriber; 
(4)  All directions for use stated on the prescription or provided by the prescriber; 
(5)  The date on which the controlled substance was dispensed or supplied; 
(6)  The name, quantity and strength of the controlled substance and, if applicable, the name of the distributor or manufacturer. 
(C)  The requirements of subsection (B) of this section do not apply when a controlled substance is prescribed or supplied for administration to an ultimate user who is institutionalized. 
(D)  A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs who personally furnishes a controlled substance to a patient shall comply with division (A) of ORC 4729.291 with respect to labeling and packaging of the controlled substance. 
(E)  No person shall alter, deface, or remove any label affixed pursuant to this section as long as any of the original contents remain. 
(F)  Every label for a schedule II, III or IV controlled substance shall contain the following warning: 
"Caution: federal law prohibits the transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient for whom it was prescribed". 
(ORC 3719.08) 
(G)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, ORC 3719.07 or 3719.08 or a drug abuse offense, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 3719.99) 
Sec. 513.10. - Hypodermic possession, display and dispensing. 
(A)  Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following: 
(1)  A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent or employee of that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business; 
(2)  Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of business; 
(3)  A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course of the person's profession or employment; 
(4)  A person, when the hypodermic was lawfully obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs; 
(5)  A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical, educational or medicinal purposes; 
(6)  A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal; 
(7)  A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional, mechanical, trade or craft purposes. 
(B)  No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees, and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft or acquisition by any unauthorized person. 
(ORC 3719.172) 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, ORC 3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B) or (E), or 3719.31 or a drug abuse offense, a violation is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 3719.99) 
Sec. 513.11. - Harmful intoxicants; possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicle. 
(A)  As used in this section, motor vehicle , street and highway have the same meanings as in ORC 4511.01. 
(B)  Unless authorized under ORC Chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731, 4741 or 4765, no person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking; 
(2)  While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. 
(ORC 2925.33) 
Sec. 513.12. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(A)  As used in this section, drug paraphernalia means any equipment, product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the offender for use or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2925. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment, products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use or designated by the offender for use, in any of the following manners: 
(1)  A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance; 
(3)  Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine; 
(4)  An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species of a plant that is a controlled substance; 
(5)  Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, a controlled substance; 
(6)  A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled substance; 
(7)  A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance; 
(8)  A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana; 
(9)  A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding a controlled substance; 
(10)  A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small quantities of a controlled substance; 
(11)  A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled substance; 
(12)  A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body; 
(13)  An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller. 
(B)  In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Any statement by the owner, or by anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, concerning its use; 
(2)  The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2925; 
(3)  The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any controlled substance; 
(4)  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the equipment, product or material; 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any person whom the owner or person in control of the equipment, product or material knows intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2925. A finding that the owner, or anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2925, does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(6)  Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment, product or material concerning its use; 
(7)  Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or material and explaining or depicting its use; 
(8)  National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment, product or material; 
(9)  The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or material is displayed for sale; 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment, product or material in the community; 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or material. 
(C)  (1)  Subject to subsection (D)(2) of this section, no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if the person knows or reasonably should know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug paraphernalia. 
(3)  No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates primarily within this State, if the person knows that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in the State of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(D)  (1)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with ORC Chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Section 513.10. 
(2)  Subsection (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person's use, or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana. 
(E)  Notwithstanding ORC Ch. 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized, after a conviction for that violation shall be forfeited, and upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to ORC 2981.12. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (C)(1) hereof is guilty of illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (F)(3) hereof, whoever violates subsection (C)(2) hereof is guilty of dealing in drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (C)(2) hereof by selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  Whoever violates subsection (C)(3) hereof is guilty of illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(G)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with ORC 2925.38. 
(ORC 2925.14) 
Sec. 513.121. - Marihuana drug paraphernalia. 
(A)  As used in this section, drug paraphernalia has the same meaning as in Section 513.12. 
(B)  In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in subsection (B) of Section 513.12. 
(C)  No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana. 
(D)  This section does not apply to any person identified in subsection (D)(1) of Section 513.12 and it shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Section 513.10. 
(E)  Subsection (E) of Section 513.12 applies with respect to any drug paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section. 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section is guilty of illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor. 
(G)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with ORC 2925.38. 
(ORC 2925.141) 
Sec. 513.13. - Counterfeit controlled substances. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled substance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2925.37) 
(C)  The court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of ORC 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(ORC 2925.37) 
Sec. 513.14. - Sale of cigarette papers to minors. 
(A)  No person shall sell to a minor any paper product commonly marketed, packaged or sold for the purpose of manufacturing or preparing tobacco products to be ingested, inhaled or otherwise introduced into the human body. 
(B)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 45-97. Passed 7-24-1997.) 
Sec. 513.15. - Offender may be required to pay for controlled substance tests. 
In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under ORC 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under ORC 2925.51, or in any other manner on any substance that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. 
The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender. 
(ORC 2925.511) 
Sec. 513.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 515. - TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE USE ON CITY OWNED PROPERTY 

Sec. 515.01. - Findings; intent; scope. 
(A)  Medical studies have conclusively shown that exposure to second hand smoke from tobacco causes illness and disease, including lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory illness. Medical studies have also shown that smokeless tobacco (such as chewing tobacco and snuff) also increases the risk of cancer and other adverse health effects. Smoking has been declared by the State Legislature pursuant to ORC Ch. 3794 to be a statewide concern and, therefore, it is in the best interests of public health that smoking or use of tobacco products be prohibited and/or restricted on property owned or under the control of the City. Pursuant to ORC 3794.01 et seq., there is now a uniform state-wide minimum standard to protect people from the health hazards associated with exposure to second hand smoke from tobacco. 
(B)  Prohibiting the use of electronic cigarettes on City property or at a City sponsored event will protect the health of the citizens of the City of Marysville. 
(C)  The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to further its purpose of protecting public health and shall prevail over any less restrictive State or local laws or regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited by other laws or regulations. 
(Ord. 32-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 515.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  Tobacco Products means any smokable or non-smokable tobacco substance, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or any lighted tobacco product. 
(B)  Electronic cigarette means any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device. The term shall include e-cigarette, vapor cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic pipe or related products. 
(Ord. 32-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 515.03. - Tobacco and electronic cigarettes prohibited on city property. 
(A)  Use of tobacco and electronic cigarettes is hereby prohibited on any City property or at any city-sponsored event. Signs prohibiting said use shall be conspicuously posted or displayed in a position clearly visible on entry at every building, facility, city-sponsored event and/or grounds. 
(B)  No person found to be using tobacco or an electronic cigarette in violation of subsection (A) shall fail to immediately cease said activity when requested to do so by a City employee. 
(C)  Lake of intent to violate a provision of this chapter shall not be a defense to a violation. 
(Ord. 32-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 515.04. - Interpretation of chapter. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco use where it is otherwise prohibited by law or to relieve any person from any liability arising from exposure to tobacco smoke. 
(Ord. 36-13. Passed 10-10-2013.) 
Sec. 515.99. - Penalties. 
(A)  Whoever violates Section 515.03(A), hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. Upon a conviction for a first offense the fine shall be not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); upon a conviction for a second offense the fine shall be not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); upon a conviction for a third or subsequent offense the fine shall be not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(B)  Whoever violates Section 515.03(B) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 36-13. Passed 10-10-2013.) 
CHAPTER 517. - GAMBLING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; contributing to delinquency of minors, ORC 2151.41; search warrants, ORC 2933.21(E); licensing charitable bingo games, ORC 2915.08. 
State Constitution reference- Lotteries prohibited; exception, Ohio Const., Art. XV, Sec. 6. 

Sec. 517.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Bookmaking means the business of receiving or paying off bets. 
(B)  Bet means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event, undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk. 
(C)  Scheme of chance means a slot machine unless authorized under ORC Ch. 3772, lottery unless authorized under ORC Ch. 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participate gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. Scheme of chance includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a prize in the following instances: 
(1)  Less than fifty per cent of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at any one location; 
(2)  Less than fifty per cent of participants who purchase goods or services at any one location do not accept, use or redeem the goods or services sold or purportely sold; 
(3)  More than fifty per cent of prizes at any one location are revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a casino game as defined in ORC 3772.01; 
(4)  The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised; 
(5)  A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more game entries; 
(6)  A participant may use the electronic device to purchase additional game entries; 
(7)  A participant may purchase additional game entries by using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device; 
(8)  A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than twenty per cent of the gross revenue received at one location; or 
(9)  A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device. 
As used in this subsection, electronic device means a mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors. 
(D)  Game of chance means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo. 
(E)  Game of chance conducted for profit means any game of chance designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not include bingo. 
(F)  Gambling device means any of the following: 
(1)  A book, totalizer or other equipment for recording bets; 
(2)  A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet; 
(3)  A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance; 
(4)  Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially designed for gambling purposes; 
(5)  Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of this chapter. 
(G)  Gambling offense means the following: 
(1)  A violation of ORC 2915.02-2915.092, 2915.10 or 2915.11; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (G)(1) hereof or a violation of ORC 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, of which gambling is an element; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing an offense under subsection (G)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(H)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, charitable organization means either of the following: 
(1)  An organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter's organization, veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal, income taxation under subsection 501(c)(4), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have been in continuous existence as such in this State for a period of two years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license under ORC 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in division (D) of ORC 2915.02. 
(I)  Religious organization means any church, body of communicants or group that is not organized or operated for profit, that gathers in common membership for regular worship and religious observances. 
(J)  Veteran's organization means any individual post or state headquarters of a national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a national veteran's association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran's association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with the national veteran's association or has received a letter from the national veteran's association indicating that the state headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran's association. As used in this subsection, national veteran's association means any veteran's association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least five thousand persons. 
(K)  Volunteer firefighter's organization means any organization of volunteer firefighters, as defined in ORC 146.01, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county, municipal corporation, or township. 
(L)  Fraternal organization means any society, order, state headquarters, or association within this State, except a college or high school fraternity, that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business of sodality of its members. 
(M)  Volunteer rescue service organization means any organization of volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization as defined in ORC 4765.01. 
(N)  Charitable bingo game means any bingo game described in subsection (O)(1) or (2) of this section that is conducted by a charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to ORC 2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose. 
(O)  Bingo means either of the following: 
(1)  A game with all of the following characteristics: 
(a)  The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into twenty-five spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space. 
(b)  The participants cover the space on the bingo cards or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a bingo game operator. 
(c)  A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance, either manually or mechanically from a receptacle that contains seventy-five objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the seventy-five possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets. 
(d)  The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and numbers as described in subsection (O)(1)(c) hereof, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by a participant. 
(2)  Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles. 
(P)  Conduct means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a sweepstakes. 
(Q)  Bingo game operator means any person, except security personnel, who performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but not limited to, collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. 
(R)  Participant means any person who plays bingo. 
(S)  Bingo session means a period that includes both of the following: 
(1)  Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more games described in subsection (O)(1) of this section, instant bingo, and seal cards; 
(2)  A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period described in subsection (S)(1) of this section. 
(T)  Gross receipts means all money or assets, including admission fees, that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. Gross receipts does not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply: 
(1)  The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years prior to conducting bingo. 
(2)  The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the purchase of that food or beverage. 
(3)  The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices. 
(U)  Security personnel includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or a police officer of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a peace officer's training course pursuant to ORC 109.71-109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted. 
(V)  Charitable purpose means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to, any of the following: 
(1)  Any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any of its possessions, at least seventy-five per cent of the members of which are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in division (B)(12) of ORC 5739.02, is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in division (B)(12) of ORC 5739.02, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief; 
(3)  A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in this State for fifteen years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals if contributions for such use would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under subsection 170 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(4)  A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net profit for the purposes set forth in subsection (K) of this section. 
(W)  Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as now or hereafter amended. 
(X)  Youth athletic organization means any organization, not organized for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are twenty-one years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association. 
(Y)  Youth athletic park organization means any organization, not organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following: 
(1)  It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of the following: 
(a)  The playing fields are used at least one hundred days per year for athletic activities by one or more organizations not organized for profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are eighteen years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association; 
(b)  The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at any time during the year, 
(2)  It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the operation, maintenance and improvement of its playing fields of the type described in paragraph (1) hereof. 
(Z)  Bingo supplies means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are bingo supplies are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, bingo supplies are not to be considered equipment used to conduct a bingo game. 
(AA)  Instant bingo means a form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card or bingo blower. In all instant bingo the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. Instant bingo does not include any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations. 
(BB)  Seal card means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols. 
(CC)  Raffle means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. Raffle does not include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and 
(2)  The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away. 
(DD)  Punch board means a board containing a number of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number. 
(EE)  Gross profit means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the payment of prize awards. 
(FF)  Net profit means gross profit minus expenses. 
(GG)  Expenses means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of the following: 
(1)  The purchase or lease of bingo supplies; 
(2)  The annual license fee required under ORC 2915.08; 
(3)  Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account described in ORC 2915.10; 
(4)  Audits and accounting services; 
(5)  Safes; 
(6)  Cash registers; 
(7)  Hiring security personnel; 
(8)  Advertising bingo; 
(9)  Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session; 
(10)  Tables and chairs; 
(11)  Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization's facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen; 
(12)  Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted; 
(13)  Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under division (B)(1) of ORC 2915.08. 
(HH)  Person has the same meaning as in ORC 1.59 and includes any firm or any other legal entity, however organized. 
(II)  Revoke means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under ORC 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(JJ)  Suspend means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under ORC 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(KK)  Distributor means any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does either of the following: 
(1)  Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this State; 
(2)  Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this State. 
(LL)  Manufacturer means any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale. 
(MM)  Gross annual revenues means the annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (O)(1) of this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (O)(2) of this section. 
(NN)  Instant bingo ticket dispenser means a mechanical device that dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has the following characteristics: 
(1)  It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency. 
(2)  It performs no gaming functions. 
(3)  It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise. 
(4)  It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations. 
(5)  It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels. 
(6)  It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or card is a winning or nonwinning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator. 
(7)  It may provide accounting and security features to aid in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses. 
(8)  It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive. 
(OO)  (1)  Electronic bingo aid means an electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all of the following: 
(a)  It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller. 
(b)  It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device. 
(c)  It identifies a winning bingo pattern. 
(2)  Electronic bingo aid does not include any device into which a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play. 
(PP)  Deal of instant bingo tickets means a single game of instant bingo tickets all with the same serial number. 
(QQ)  (1)  Slot machine means either of the following: 
(a)  Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain; 
(b)  Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance. 
(2)  Slot machine does not include a skill-based amusement machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser. 
(RR)  Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo means gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo conducted by a veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real property taxes, and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo is conducted. 
(SS)  Charitable instant bingo organization means an organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A charitable instant bingo organization does not include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to ORC 2915.13. 
(TT)  Game flare means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following information for the game: 
(1)  The name of the game; 
(2)  The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo; 
(3)  The form number; 
(4)  The ticket count; 
(5)  The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets; 
(6)  The cost per play; 
(7)  The serial number of the game. 
(UU)  (1)  Skill-based amusement machine means mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply: 
(a)  The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed ten dollars; 
(b)  Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than ten dollars; 
(c)  Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars times the fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that prize; and 
(d)  Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play. 
A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for purposes of division (UU)(1) of this section even if the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based amusement machine. 
(2)  A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the following apply: 
(a)  The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game. 
(b)  Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the player's score; 
(c)  The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a source other than any player playing the game. 
(d)  The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions. 
(e)  The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by game features not visible or known to the player. 
(f)  The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise. 
(3)  All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as described in subsection (UU)(1) of this section: 
(a)  As used in subsection (UU) of this section, game and play mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play. 
(b)  Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single noncontest, competition or tournament play. 
(c)  To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition or tournament. 
(4)  For purposes of subsection (UU)(1) of this section, the mere presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine. 
(VV)  Merchandise prize means any item of value, but shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof; 
(2)  Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant bingo; 
(3)  Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or 
(4)  A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed in subsection (VV)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(WW)  Redeemable voucher means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash representation of value. 
(XX)  Pool not conducted for profit means a scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants. 
(YY)  Sporting organization means a hunting, fishing or trapping organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization, including but not limited to, the league of Ohio sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this State for a period of three years. 
(ZZ)  Community action agency has the same meaning as in ORC 122.66. 
(AAA)   (1)  Sweepstakes terminal device means a mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes, or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply: 
(a)  The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries. 
(b)  The device utilizes software such that the simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize. 
(c)  The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of entries. 
(d)  The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry. 
(e)  The device predetermines the prize results and stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed. 
(f)  The device utilizes software to create a game result. 
(g)  The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize awarded. 
(h)  The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered. 
(2)  As used in this subsection and in Section 517.02: 
(a)  Enter means the act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes. 
(b)  Entry means one event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes terminal device until all of the sweepstakes prize results from that activation are revealed. 
(c)  Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize. 
(d)  Sweepstakes terminal device facility means any location in this Municipality where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except as provided in ORC 2915.02(G). 
(BBB)  Sweepstakes means any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon chance. Sweepstakes does not include bingo as authorized under this chapter, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by ORC Ch. 3769, lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by ORC Ch. 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by ORC Ch. 3772. 
(ORC 2915.01) 
Sec. 517.02. - Gambling. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates bookmaking; 
(2)  Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance; 
(3)  Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance; 
(4)  Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood; 
(5)  Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility and either: 
(a)  Give to another person any item described in subsection (VV)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Section 517.01 as a prize for playing or participating in a sweepstakes; or 
(b)  Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of ten dollars and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars. 
(6)  Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility without first obtaining a current annual certificate of registration from the Attorney General as required by division (F) of ORC 2915.02. 
(7)  With purpose to violate subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device. 
(B)  For purposes of subsection (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of subsection (A)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such game or scheme. 
(C)  This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(D)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Games of chance, if all of the following apply: 
(a)  The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for money. 
(b)  The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization that is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is, exempt from Federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. 
A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (D)(1)(c) hereof if the veteran's or fraternal organization has already leased the premises twelve times during the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (D)(1)(c) hereof, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under Section 517.06(B)(1) when it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct bingo games. 
(d)  All of the money or assets received from the games of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of chance are used by, or given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), (2) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(e)  The games of chance are not conducted during, or within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Section 517.13. 
No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donations, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance. 
(2)  Any tag fishing tournament operated under a permit issued under ORC 1533.92, as tag fishing tournament is defined in ORC 1531.01. 
(3)  Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license issued under ORC 2915.08. 
(E)  Subsection (D) hereof shall not be construed to authorize the sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games of chance, as granted by subsection (D) hereof, by any charitable organization that is granted that right. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, gambling is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.02) 
Sec. 517.03. - Operating a gambling house. 
(A)  No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or supervision of premises, shall: 
(1)  Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of Section 517.02; 
(2)  Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied for gambling in violation of Section 517.02. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(C)  Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to ORC Ch. 3767. 
(ORC 2915.03) 
Sec. 517.04. - Public gaming. 
(A)  No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance. 
(B)  No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or supervision, of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  Subsections (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(E)  Premises used or occupied in violation of subsection (B) of this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under ORC Ch. 3767. 
(ORC 2915.04) 
Sec. 517.05. - Cheating. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of any of the following: 
(1)  The subject of a bet; 
(2)  A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic or sporting event; 
(3)  A scheme or game of chance; 
(4)  Bingo. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection cheating is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in ORC 2913.01, cheating is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.05) 
Sec. 517.06. - Methods of conducting a bingo game; prohibitions. 
(A)  No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of the following: 
(1)  Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment; 
(2)  Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed in its license application and described in Section 517.01(V), or distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and in accordance with ORC 2915.101. 
(B)  No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in Section 517.01(O)(1) shall fail to do any of the following: 
(1)  Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per bingo session or forty-five per cent of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall provide the premises to the organization and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week. 
(2)  Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo session is conducted; 
(3)  Conduct the bingo session in accordance with the definition of bingo set forth in Section 517.01(O)(1). 
(C)  No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in Section 517.01(O)(1) shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages; 
(2)  Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in relation to the bingo session; 
(3)  Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in the bingo session; 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(4) of this section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions; 
(5)  Pay out more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) in prizes for bingo games described in Section 517.01(O)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization. Prizes does not include awards from the conduct of instant bingo; 
(6)  Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period between two a.m. and ten a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to ORC 2915.12, at any premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified on its license. Subsection (C)(6) of this section does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at nine a.m. for a bingo session that begins at ten a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time, specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended license, pursuant to division (F) of ORC 2915.08. A charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on its amended license; 
(7)  Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, is under the age of eighteen to work as a bingo game operator; 
(8)  Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator; 
(9)  Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service; 
(10)  Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a distributor issued a license under ORC 2915.081; 
(11)  (a)  Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under the following circumstances: 
i.  For any single participant, not more than ninety bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids. 
ii.  The charitable organization shall provide a participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets. 
iii.  The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an electronic bingo aid. 
iv.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted. 
v.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used. 
vi.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used. 
(b)  The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with ORC Ch. 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during each bingo session. 
(12)  Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have known, to be under eighteen years of age to play bingo described in Section 517.01(O)(1). 
(D)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(3) hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(3) hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(3)  Nothing in subsection (D) hereof prohibits an employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization's members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo. 
(E)  Notwithstanding subsection (B)(1) of this section, a charitable organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977. 
(F)  This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize. 
(G)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (A)(1) or (2), (B)(1), (2), or (3), (C)(1) to (11) or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (2), (B)(1), (2) or (3), (C)(1) to (11), or (D) of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (2), (B)(1), (2) or (3) or (C)(1) to (11) or (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates subsection (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (C)(12) of this section, a violation of subsection (C)(12) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.09) 
Sec. 517.07. - Instant bingo conduct. 
(A)  No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to comply with the requirements of divisions (A)(1), (2), and (3) of ORC 2915.09; 
(2)  Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies: 
(a)  That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, is a charitable organization as defined in Section 517.01, is in good standing in the State pursuant to ORC 2915.08, and is in compliance with ORC Ch. 1716; 
(b)  That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) or is a veteran's organization described in subsection 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, and conducts instant bingo under Section 517.14. 
(3)  Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to ORC 2915.08; 
(4)  Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo; 
(5)  Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed under ORC 2915.081; 
(6)  Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare; 
(7)  Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under eighteen years of age; 
(8)  Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than three years; 
(9)  Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages; 
(10)  Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in Section 517.09(D); 
(11)  Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in an instant bingo game; 
(12)  (a)  Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold; 
(b)  Subsection (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare. 
(13)  Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards; 
(14)  Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not purchased from a distributor licensed under ORC 2915.081 as reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required by Section 517.11(F); 
(15)  Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold; 
(16)  Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with ORC 2915.01 to 2915.13. 
(B)  A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section or a rule adopted under ORC 2915.091(C) is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (A) of this section or of such a rule, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.091) 
Sec. 517.08. - Raffles. 
(A)  (1)  Subject to subsection (A)(2) of this section, a charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and is described in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit. 
(2)  If a charitable organization that is described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least fifty per cent of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Section 517.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or any political subdivision. 
(B)  Except as provided in subsection (A) of this section, no person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for profit. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (B) of this section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.092) 
Sec. 517.09. - Charitable instant bingo organizations. 
(A)  As used in this section, retail income from all commercial activity means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services, or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, at not more than one location at which it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and guests as retail income. 
(B)  (1)  If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location. 
(2)  A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day. 
(C)  Except as provided in subsection (F) of this section, no charitable instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets. 
(D)  The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets. 
The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay six per cent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this subsection. 
As used in this subsection, expenses means those items provided for in subsections (GG)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (12) and (13) of Section 517.01 and that percentage of the owner's or lessor's rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses in the aggregate, shall not exceed six per cent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets. 
As used in this subsection, full gross profit means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal had been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were redeemed. 
(E)  A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney General with all of the following information: 
(1)  That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a contract entered into pursuant to subsection (B) of this section with an owner or lessor of a location; 
(2)  That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a written contract pursuant to subsection (B) of this section with a new owner or lessor of a location; 
(3)  That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that is in violation of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2915. 
(F)  Subsection (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five years, had gross receipts of at least one million five hundred thousand dollars. 
(ORC 2915.093) 
Sec. 517.10. - Location of instant bingo. 
(A)  No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written contract, as described in Section 517.09, with the charitable instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(B)  The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(C)  No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in subsection (A) of this section shall violate any provision of ORC Ch. 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of ORC Ch. 2915. 
(D)  No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in subsection (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the contract. 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violates subsection (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the State or a political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General. 
(ORC 2915.094) 
Sec. 517.11. - Bingo or game of chance records. 
(A)  No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance pursuant to Section 517.02(D), shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted: 
(1)  An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number; 
(2)  An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses; 
(3)  A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or more in value; 
(4)  An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of the bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other purpose set forth in Section 517.01(V), Section 517.02(D), or ORC 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose; 
(5)  The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization; 
(6)  A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the receipts were excluded from gross receipts, Section 517.01(T); 
(7)  An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses. 
(B)  A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required to maintain pursuant to subsection (A) of this section at its principal place of business in this State or at its headquarters in this State and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept. 
(C)  The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in Section 517.01(O)(1) or (2) shall be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the bingo session or game account. 
(D)  Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year. 
(E)  The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with ORC Ch. 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted for. 
(F)  A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this State. The record shall include all of the following for each instance: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase; 
(2)  The name and address of the charitable organization or other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided; 
(3)  A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies; 
(4)  Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each charitable organization. 
(G)  A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this State. The record shall include all of the following for each instance: 
(1)  The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided; 
(2)  A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including serial numbers; 
(3)  Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each distributor. 
(H)  The Attorney General, or any law enforcement agency, may do all of the following: 
(1)  Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization; 
(2)  Examine the accounts and records of the organization; 
(3)  Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games of chance; 
(4)  Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of chance are conducted; 
(5)  Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred and to determine whether Section 517.12 has been complied with. 
If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this chapter, provided that the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as described in this subsection. 
(I)  No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (H) of this section. 
(J)  Whoever violates subsection (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2915.10) 
Sec. 517.12. - Bingo operator prohibitions. 
(A)  No person shall be a bingo game operator unless he is eighteen years of age or older. 
(B)  No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(D)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2915.11) 
Sec. 517.13. - Bingo exceptions. 
(A)  ORC 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements specified in either subsection (A)(1) or (2) hereof: 
(1)  (a)  The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of value including an admission fee, or any fee for bingo cards, sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game or to defray any costs of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the bingo game. 
(b)  All prizes awarded during the course of the game are nonmonetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlements to goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game. 
(d)  The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours of any of the following: 
i.  A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to ORC 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter; 
ii.  A scheme or game of chance or bingo described in Section 517.01(O)(2). 
(e)  The number of players participating in the bingo game does not exceed fifty. 
(2)  (a)  The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents ($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo. 
(b)  The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments. 
(d)  The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(e)  No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game. 
(f)  The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of either of the following: 
i.  A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to ORC 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter; 
ii.  A scheme of chance or game of chance or bingo described in Section 517.01(O)(2). 
(g)  All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo game is conducted. 
(h)  The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and not more than twice in a calendar week. 
(B)  The Attorney General, or any local law enforcement agency, may investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported amusement bingo game does not comply with subsection (A) hereof. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action. 
(ORC 2915.12) 
Sec. 517.14. - Instant bingo conduct by a veteran's or fraternal organization. 
(A)  A veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to ORC 2915.01-2915.12 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to twelve hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m. 
(2)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its own members and invited guests. 
(3)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization is raising money for an organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State and executes a written contract with that organization as required in subsection (B) of this section. 
(B)  If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (A) of this section is raising money for another organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State, the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2) or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State. 
(C)  (1)  If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under ORC Ch. 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2915. 
(2)  No veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2915. 
(D)  A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization has entered into a written contract. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.13) 
Sec. 517.15. - Skill-based amusement machines. 
(A)  (1)  No person shall give to another person any item described in Section 517.01(VV)(1), (2), (3), or (4) in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-prize game won on a skill-based amusement machine. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty of skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct. Except as provided herein, a violation of subsection (A)(1) is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (A)(1), a violation of subsection (A)(1) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.06) 
(B)  Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by this chapter and ORC Ch. 2915 and not by ORC Ch. 1345. 
(ORC 2915.061) 
Sec. 517.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 521. - HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Tampering with safety devices,  541.04 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; flagpole installation in sidewalk, ORC 723.012; excavation liability, ORC 723.49 et seq.; removal of noxious weeds or litter, ORC 731.51 et seq.; nuisances, ORC Ch. 3767. 

Sec. 521.01. - Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers. 
(A)  No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
(ORC 3767.29) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
Sec. 521.02. - Venting of heaters and burners. 
(A)  A brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace, water heater or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gas: 
(1)  When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning; 
(2)  When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in subsection (A) hereof, or used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning. 
(B)  This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the same are used as space or room heaters. 
(C)  No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this section. 
(D)  Subsection (A) hereof does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shutoff system, and that has its fuel piped from a source outside of the building in which it is located, that are approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under ORC 3737.82. 
(E)  The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from subsection (A) hereof when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under ORC 3781.10. No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules adopted under this subsection. 
(F)  The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules adopted under this subsection. 
(G)  No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having a flash point below one hundred degrees fahrenheit or thirty-seven and eight-tenths degrees centigrade shall be sold, offered for sale or used in any kerosene space heater. 
(H)  No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas space heater. 
(I)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from subsection (A) hereof unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use." 
(J)  No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under ORC 3737.82. 
(ORC 3701.82) 
(K)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 3701.99(C)) 
Sec. 521.03. - Barricades and warning lights; abandoned excavations. 
(A)  No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to life or limb. 
(B)  No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent injury to life or limb. 
(C)  Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement, cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.04. - Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury. 
(A)  No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk, playground or other public place any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or upon such sidewalk or playground. 
(B)  No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement. 
(C)  No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods, material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the delivery or pickup of such articles. In no such case shall the obstruction remain on such sidewalk for more than one hour. 
(D)  No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise, goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage or injury. The affected area shall be rendered safe and free from danger. 
(E)  No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous condition. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.05. - Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances. 
(A)  No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is made as required by law: 
To fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains or natural watercourses as provided in ORC 715.47. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.06. - Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean. 
(A)  No owner or occupant of abutting lands shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs or gutters in repair and free from snow, ice or any nuisance. 
(ORC 723.011) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.07. - Fences. 
(A)  No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical current. 
(B)  No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence which abuts or is adjacent to any public street or sidewalk. This subsection (B) does not prevent the placement and use of not more than three strands of barbed wire on top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided such strands are not less than seventy-two inches from the ground. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.08. - Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk, etc. 
(A)  No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him, or in or on waters of the State, or Municipality, unless one of the following applies: 
(1)  The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a litter collection drive; 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, the person deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away by the elements; or 
(3)  The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter pursuant to ORC Chapter 3734 or 6111. 
(B)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter, or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public property or on any private property not owned by him, unless one of the following applies: 
(1)  The litter was generated or located on the property on which the litter receptacle is located. 
(2)  The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a litter collection drive. 
(3)  The person is directed to do so by a person whom he reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle. 
(4)  The litter consists of any of the following: 
(a)  The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle; 
(b)  The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or carried and used in a motor vehicle; 
(c)  Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings and containers of a type and in an amount that may reasonably be expected to be generated during routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle; 
(d)  Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers and other materials of a type and in an amount that may reasonably be expected to be generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle by a casual passerby. 
(C)  (1)  As used in subsection (B)(1) hereof, public property includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business, the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of access. 
(2)  As used in subsection (B)(4) hereof, casual passerby means a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as his primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter receptacle is located. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Litter means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(2)  Deposit means to throw, drop, discard or place. 
(3)  Litter receptacle means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal. 
(ORC 3767.32) 
(E)  No person shall cause or allow litter to be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public, or unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render unwholesome or impure, any natural watercourse. 
(F)  Whoever violates any provision of subsections (A) to (D) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in lieu of the penalty provided in this subsection require a person who violates subsections (A) to (D) hereof to remove litter from any public or private property, or in or on any waters. 
(ORC 3767.99(C)) 
(G)  Whoever violates subsection (E) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 521.09. - Noxious or offensive odors. 
(A)  No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling, building, structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade, employment or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public. 
(ORC 3767.13) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
Sec. 521.10. - Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly. 
(A)  As used in this section, place of public assembly means: 
(1)  Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums; classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a rest home serving as the residence of a person living in such rest home; 
(2)  All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the State,its agencies or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and State institutions for the mentally ill and persons with intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries; museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building or other enclosed structure that is owned by the State, a State agency or a political subdivision and that is used primarily as a food service establishment is not a place of public assembly. 
(3)  Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not included in subsection (A)(1) or (2) hereof is a place of public assembly if it has a seating capacity of fifty or more persons and is available to the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes, cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as bowling alleys and places licensed by the Department of Liquor Control to sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of public assembly. 
(B)  For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which shall be designated a no smoking area. Provided that, no more than one-half of the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available to the public. In places included in subsection (A)(1) hereof the local fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate no smoking area. In places included in subsection (A)(2) hereof that are owned by the Municipality, Council shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places included in subsection (A)(3) hereof, the person having control of the operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area. In places included in subsection (A)(2) hereof which are also included in subsection (A)(1) hereof, the officer who has authority to designate the area in places in subsection (A)(2) hereof shall designate the no smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly visible and that state "NO SMOKING". No person shall remove signs from areas designated as no smoking areas. 
(C)  This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in ORC 3313.751(B). 
(D)  No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in accordance with subsection (B) hereof or ORC 3791.031. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 3791.031) 
Sec. 521.11. - Nuisances. 
(A)  No owner or occupant of any real or other property located within the Municipality shall permit the same to be used, occupied, conducted and/or maintained in any manner which has been declared to be a nuisance. 
(B)  Any police officer having knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that a nuisance exists shall report the same to the Director of Administration. 
(C)  If the Director of Administration, after such inquiry and/or inspection as he deems necessary, believes that a violation of this section has occurred, he shall cause a written notice to be prepared and served upon such owner and/or occupant requiring such owner or occupant to take proper action to abate such violation within a certain time to be specified in such notice, which time shall be not less than twenty-four hours and not more than fifteen days, and which notice shall further notify such owner or occupant that if such condition is not abated within the time specified in such notice, the Municipality will take whatever action is necessary to abate such condition and charge any expense incurred by the Municipality in connection therewith to such owner or occupant. 
(D)  The Municipality, by and through its proper officers and agents, shall have authority and power by proper court procedure to maintain and conduct court proceedings for abatement of any nuisances existing in the Municipality, which remedy shall be in addition to the penal provisions hereinafter contained. 
(E)  If the owner, person in charge or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance consisting of the accumulation of litter on any private premises fails to abate the same within the time limited in the notice therefor, the enforcing officer is authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by removing the litter and clearing the private premises. The cost of abating such nuisance plus an additional fifteen percent for overhead and other expenses, shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant thereof or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within sixty days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against the premises in the manner provided by law or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed the Municipality. 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each days continued violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
Sec. 521.12. - Litter on private premises; definition. 
(A)  No owner or occupant of any premises lying within the Municipality shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the Municipality, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of occupied private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter shall be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(B)  The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(C)  As used in this section litter means debris, tin cans, waste paper, waste rubbish, garbage, filth, refuse, vermin, decaying or dead matter, abandoned automobiles, wrecked or dismantled automobiles, automobiles unusable and unmoved for ninety days, junk or industrial wastes. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 71-02. Passed 12-5-2002.) 
Sec. 521.13. - Incineration of waste materials. 
(A)  Disposition of waste material through incineration shall be limited to only the waste produced at the site or building in the City at which incineration is to occur. 
(B)  No incinerator on any site in the City shall be used to incinerate waste material brought to that site from another site, within or outside the City. 
(C)  Whoever violates the provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 15-90. Passed 4-26-1990.) 
Sec. 521.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 525. - LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC OFFICE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement officer defined, 501.01(K); misconduct at an emergency,  509.05; making false alarms,  509.07; personating an officer to defraud,  545.16. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law. 

Sec. 525.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Public official means any elected or appointed officer, or employee, or agent of the State or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to, legislators, judges and law enforcement officers. Public official does not include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under ORC 187.01. 
(B)  Public servant means any of the following: 
(1)  Any public official; 
(2)  Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including, but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master, arbitrator, advisor or consultant; 
(3)  A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not the person is elected or appointed to the office for which the person is a candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this subsection if the person has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public office, or if the person has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to have the person's name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special election, or if the person campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary, general or special election. Public servant does not include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under ORC 187.01. 
(C)  Party official means any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a political party in the United States or this State, by virtue of which the person directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs at any level of responsibility. 
(D)  Official proceeding means any proceeding before a legislative, judicial, administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition in connection with an official proceeding. 
(E)  Detention means arrest, confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest, confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged with or convicted of a crime in this State or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this State or another state or under the laws of the United States; hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of ORC 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39 or 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation, except as provided in this subsection, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures; that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of release from a State correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this State into this State by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under ORC 311.29(E) or ORC 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to ORC 5147.30, detention includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site. 
(F)  Detention facility means any public or private place used for the confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this State or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this State or another state or under the laws of the United States. 
(G)  Valuable thing or valuable benefit includes, but is not limited to, a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986. 
(H)  Campaign committee, contribution, political action committee, legislative campaign fund , political party and political contributing entity have the same meanings as in ORC 3517.01. 
(I)  Provider agreement has the same meaning as in ORC 5164.01. 
(ORC 2921.01) 
Sec. 525.02. - Falsification. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The statement is made in any official proceeding. 
(2)  The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another. 
(3)  The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in performing the public official's official function. 
(4)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention and contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic development assistance as defined in ORC 9.66; or other benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury. 
(5)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate, registration, release or provider agreement. 
(6)  The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or another person empowered to administer oaths. 
(7)  The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or return that is required or authorized by law. 
(8)  The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed relies upon it to that person's detriment. 
(9)  The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a theft offense. 
(10)  The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application, petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report. 
(11)  The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or other writing that is required by law. 
(12)  The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a court of record. 
(13)  The statement is required under ORC 5743.71 in connection with the person's purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under subsection (A)(6) hereof that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner. 
(C)  If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but only that one or the other was false. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates any provision of subsection (A)(1) to (8) or (10) to (13) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(9) hereof is guilty of falsification in a theft offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(E)  A person who violates this section is liable in a civil action to any person harmed by the violation for injury, death, or loss to person or property incurred as a result of the commission of the offense and for reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred as a result of prosecuting the civil action commenced under this section. A civil action under this section is not the exclusive remedy of a person who incurs injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of a violation of this section. 
(ORC 2921.13) 
Sec. 525.03. - Impersonation of peace officer. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Peace officer means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or township constable who is employed by a political subdivision of this State; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under ORC 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority under ORC 306.35(Y), a State university law enforcement officer appointed under ORC 3345.04; a veterans' home police officer appointed under ORC 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under ORC 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the State or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a State highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the State or any of its political subdivisions. 
(2)  Private police officer means any security guard, special police officer, private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police capacity. 
(3)  Federal law enforcement officer means an employee of the United States who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation, apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses under the criminal laws of the United States. 
(4)  Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation has the same meaning as in ORC 2903.11. 
(5)  Impersonate means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of or display the identification of a particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member of that class of persons. 
(B)  No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(C)  No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, shall arrest or detain any person, search any person or search the property of any person. 
(D)  No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the State or the Municipality or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(E)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (B) hereof that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose. 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsections (C) or (D) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a violation of subsection (D) hereof is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2921.51) 
Sec. 525.04. - Compounding a crime. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending criminal prosecution. 
(B)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both of the following apply: 
(1)  The pending prosecution involved is for violation of Sections 545.05, 545.07, 545.09 or 545.10(B)(2), or ORC 2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, of which the actor under this section was the victim. 
(2)  The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him as restitution for the loss caused him by the offense. 
(C)  When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution under subsection (B) hereof, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the State or Municipality to abandoning the prosecution. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2921.21) 
Sec. 525.05. - Failure to report a crime, injury or knowledge of death. 
(A)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) hereof, no person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report such information to law enforcement authorities. 
(2)  No person, knowing that a violation of division (B) of ORC 2913.04 has been, or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law enforcement authorities. 
(B)  Except for conditions that are within the scope of subsection (E) of this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from an offense of violence. 
(C)  No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is obtained. For purposes of this subsection (C), advanced practice registered nurse does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist. 
(D)  No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a report required by subsection (C) of this section was made, or to any law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within the person's knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death. 
(E)  (1)  As used in this subsection, burn injury means any of the following: 
(a)  Second or third degree burns; 
(b)  Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of superheated air; 
(c)  Any burn injury or wound that may result in death; 
(d)  Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each is defined by ORC 3743.01. 
(2)  No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation, bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(3)  No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated for any burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation, bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(4)  No person who is required to report any burn injury under subsection (E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall comply with the uniform standard developed by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to ORC 3737.22(A)(15). 
(5)  Anyone participating in the making of reports under subsection (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding ORC 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person's burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted under subsection (E) of this section. 
(F)  (1)  Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker, social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist or marriage and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in ORC 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient's or client's records. 
(2)  Notwithstanding ORC 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or belief noted under subsection (F)(1) of this section, and the information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence. 
(G)  Subsections (A) and (D) of this section do not require disclosure of information, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client; licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications relay service call. 
(2)  The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's immediate family. 
(3)  Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news source, privileged under ORC 2739.04 or 2739.12. 
(4)  Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of the clergy. 
(5)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to ORC 5119.36. 
(6)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of ORC 2907.02 or 2907.05 or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in violation of former ORC 2907.12. As used in this subsection, counseling services include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide those services. 
(H)  No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence. 
(I)  Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of subsection (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(J)  Whoever violates subsection (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(K)  (1)  Whoever negligently violates subsection (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever knowingly violates subsection (E) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(L)  As used in this section, nurse includes an advanced practice registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse. 
(ORC 2921.22) 
Sec. 525.06. - Failure to aid a law enforcement officer. 
(A)  No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person giving it. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 2921.23) 
Sec. 525.07. - Obstructing official business. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful duties. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official business. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (B), obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2921.31) 
Sec. 525.08. - Obstructing justice. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for a misdemeanor, or to assist another to benefit from the commission of a misdemeanor, and no person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of an act that if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other person or child; 
(2)  Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(3)  Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the misdemeanor, or act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process summoning the person to testify or supply evidence; 
(5)  Communicate false information to any person. 
(6)  Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or prosecution of the other person or child. 
(B)  A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated a delinquent child for committing, a violation of subsection (A) hereof, regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used under subsection (C) hereof in determining the penalty for the violation of subsection (A) hereof, regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice. 
(2)  If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the misdemeanor committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Adult and child have the same meanings as in ORC 2151.011. 
(2)  Delinquent child has the same meaning as in ORC 2152.02. 
(ORC 2921.32) 
Sec. 525.09. - Resisting arrest. 
(A)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another. 
(B)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law enforcement officer. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A violation of subsection (A) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of subsection (B) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2921.33) 
Sec. 525.10. - Having an unlawful interest in a public contract. 
(A)  No public official shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  During the public official's term of office or within one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission or board of which the public official was a member at the time of authorization unless the contract was let by competitive bidding, to the lowest and best bidder; 
(2)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract entered into by or for the use of the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected; 
(3)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract that is not let by competitive bidding if required by law, and that involves more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(B)  In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official, member of a public official's family or any of a public official's business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other organization that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested; 
(2)  The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as creditor does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total indebtedness of the corporation or other organization; 
(3)  That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into, files with the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in connection with the corporation or other organization. 
(C)  This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public official's business associates, has an interest, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved; 
(2)  The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved; 
(3)  The treatment accorded the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions; 
(4)  The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full knowledge by the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the public official's family or business associate, and the public official takes no part in the deliberations or decisions of the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract. 
(D)  Subsection (A)(4) does not prohibit participation by a public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or influence of the public employee's office or employment to secure benefits from the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of this section. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest in a public contract. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(F)  It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with ORC 309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipal corporation or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with ORC 733.621 and 2921.421. 
(G)  Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Public contract means any of the following: 
(a)  The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the State, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either, including the employment of an individual by the State, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either. 
(b)  A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of any public property. 
(2)  Chief legal officer has the same meaning as in ORC 733.621. 
(ORC 2921.42) 
Sec. 525.11. - Soliciting or receiving improper compensation. 
(A)  No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following: 
(1)  Any compensation, other than is allowed by ORC 102.03(G), (H), and (I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's public compensation; 
(2)  Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to perform the public servant's official duties. 
(B)  No public servant for the public servant's own personal or business use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following: 
(1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office, employment or agency; 
(2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment. 
(C)  No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the following: 
(1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office, employment or agency; 
(2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(E)  A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in this Municipality for a period of seven years from the date of conviction. 
(F)  Subsections (A), (B) and (C) hereof do not prohibit a person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions. 
(ORC 2921.43) 
Sec. 525.12. - Dereliction of duty. 
(A)  No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay; 
(2)  Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power to do so alone or with available assistance. 
(B)  No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding. 
(C)  No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary; 
(2)  Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention; 
(3)  Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another; 
(4)  Allow a prisoner to escape; 
(5)  Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the management of the detention facility. 
(D)  No public official of the Municipality shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the legislative authority of the Municipality for the use in any one year of the department, agency or institution with which the public official is connected. 
(E)  No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant's office. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(G)  As used in this section, public servant includes an officer or employee of a contractor as defined in ORC 9.08. 
Sec. 525.13. - Interfering with civil rights. 
(A)  No public servant, under color of his office, employment or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2921.45) 
Sec. 525.14. - Unauthorized display of law enforcement emblems on motor vehicles. 
(A)  No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 2913.441) 
Sec. 525.15. - Assaulting police dog or horse or an assistance dog. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted. 
(2)  The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse. 
(B)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse; 
(2)  Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse; 
(3)  Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following: 
(a)  Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer's control of the police dog or horse; 
(b)  Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog or horse; 
(c)  Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control; 
(d)  Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; 
(e)  Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to a police dog or horse. 
(5)  If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse. 
(C)  No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted. 
(2)  The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an assistance dog. 
(D)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog; 
(2)  Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog; 
(3)  Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the following: 
(a)  Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person's control of the dog; 
(b)  Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog; 
(c)  Releases the dog from its area of control; 
(d)  Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; 
(e)  Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the assisted or served person. 
(4)  Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to an assistance dog; 
(5)  If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog. 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation does not result in death, serious physical harm, or physical harm to the police dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in death or serious physical harm to the police dog or horse, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of the police dog or horse or if the violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in its death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of assaulting an assistance dog. If the violation results in physical harm to the dog other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation does not result in death, serious physical harm, or physical harm to the dog, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in death or serious physical harm to the dog, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(4)  Whoever violates subsection (D) of this section is guilty of harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of or serious physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  In addition to any other sanction or penalty imposed for the offense under this section, whoever violates subsection (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following: 
(a)  Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result of the violation by the Police Department regarding a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section; 
(b)  The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the violation; 
(c)  If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog; 
(d)  If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation. 
(F)  This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct is in accordance with ORC Ch. 4741. 
(G)  This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or assistance dog. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Physical harm means any injury, illness, or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
(2)  Police dog or horse means a dog or horse that has been trained, and may be used, to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(3)  Serious physical harm means any of the following: 
(a)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(b)  Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves some temporary, substantial maiming; 
(c)  Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that results in substantial suffering. 
(4)  Assistance dog , blind , and mobility impaired person have the same meanings as in ORC 955.011. 
(ORC 2921.321) 
Sec. 525.16. - False allegation of peace officer misconduct. 
(A)  As used in this section, peace officer has the same meaning as in ORC 2935.01. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of the officer's duties if the person knows that the allegation is false. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making a false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2921.15) 
Sec. 525.17. - Refusal to disclose personal information in public place. 
(A)  No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following: 
(1)  The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a criminal offense. 
(2)  The person witnessed any of the following: 
(a)  An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the laws of this State; 
(b)  A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or to property; 
(c)  Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing, any offense identified in subsection (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this section; 
(d)  Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in subsection (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or complicity described in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being, or is about to be committed. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(C)  Nothing in this section requires a person to answer any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed. 
(D)  It is not a violation of this section to refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing. (ORC 2921.29) 
Sec. 525.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 529. - LIQUOR CONTROL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Disorderly conduct; intoxication,  509.03; using weapons while intoxicated,  549.03. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; prohibiting sale of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, ORC 4301.22(D); local option, ORC 4301.32 et seq., 4303.29. 

Sec. 529.01. - Definitions. 
As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
(A)  Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. Such term excludes denatured alcohol and wood alcohol. 
(B)  Intoxicating liquor and liquor include all liquids and compounds, other than beer as defined in subsection (C) hereof, containing one half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever name called and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented. Such phrase includes cider and alcohol and all solids and confections which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
(C)  (1)  Beer includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from malt products and containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more, of alcohol by volume. 
(ORC 4301.01) 
(2)  Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not intoxicating liquor for purposes of this chapter. 
(ORC 4301.244) 
(D)  Person includes firms and corporations. 
(E)  Low-alcohol beverage means any brewed or fermented malt product, or any product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural products, that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent (0.5 %) of alcohol by volume. The beverages described in subsection (E) hereof do not include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer. 
(ORC 4301.01) 
Sec. 529.02. - Sales to and use by underage persons; securing public accommodations. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or ORC Ch. 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, or shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian. 
In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a violation of this subsection shall be charged, for the same offense, with a violation of ORC 4301.22(A)(1). 
(B)  No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. 
An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this subsection that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions. 
(C)  No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin, campground or restaurant when he knows or has reason to know either of the following: 
(1)  That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the underage person and is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; 
(2)  That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a practitioner and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person. 
(D)  (1)  No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage person. 
(2)  No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is twenty-one years of age or older for the purpose of violating this section. 
(E)  No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating liquor, in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The prohibitions set forth in this subsection (E) hereof against an underage person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious purposes. 
(F)  No parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Section 529.021(A)-(C). 
(G)  The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Drug of abuse has the same meaning as in ORC 3719.011. 
(2)  Hotel has the same meaning as in ORC 3731.01. 
(3)  Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and prescription have the same meanings as in ORC 4729.01. 
(4)  Minor means a person under the age of eighteen years. 
(5)  Underage person means a person under the age of twenty-one years. 
(ORC 4301.69) 
(I)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(ORC 4301.99) 
Sec. 529.021. - Purchase by minor; misrepresentation. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or ORC Ch. 4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor. 
(ORC 4301.63) 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or ORC Ch. 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or other identification of any person under twenty-one years of age for the purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a person under twenty-one years of age, by purchase, or as a gift. 
(ORC 4301.633) 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or ORC Ch. 4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the person's name, age or other identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any place where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control or sold by the Division of Liquor Control. 
(ORC 4301.634) 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (A) hereof may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed. 
(3)  (a)  Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of that subsection, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. 
(b)  On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in ORC 4510.02(A)(7). 
(c)  On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. Except as provided in this subsection, the court also may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in ORC 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of twenty-one years. The court, in lieu of suspending the offenders temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license or driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall perform. 
(ORC 4301.99) 
Sec. 529.03. - Sales to intoxicated persons. 
(A)  No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person. 
(ORC 4301.22) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4301.99) 
Sec. 529.04. - Liquor consumption in motor vehicle. 
(A)  No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in Section 529.07(D). 
(ORC 4301.64) 
(B)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(C)  If an offender who violates this section was under the age of eighteen years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license or driver's license, the court may instead require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours to be determined by the court. If the offender is fifteen years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of fifteen years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of sixteen years. 
(ORC 4301.99) 
Sec. 529.05. - Permit required. 
(A)  No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent or employee shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating liquor in this Municipality, or transport, import or cause to be transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol on or into this Municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied with ORC Chs. 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time. 
(ORC 4303.25) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 529.06. - Low-alcohol beverages: sale to and purchase by underage persons prohibited. 
(A)  As used in this section, underage person means a person under eighteen years of age. 
(B)  No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage. 
(C)  No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt to purchase any low-alcohol beverage. 
(D)  No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage person, by purchase or as a gift. 
(E)  No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the person's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this Municipality. 
(F)  No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian. 
(G)  No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage. 
An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions. 
(H)  No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol beverage in any public or private place, unless accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious purposes. 
(I)  No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this section. 
(ORC 4301.631) 
(J)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(K)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (B) hereof may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed. 
(ORC 4301.99) 
Sec. 529.07. - Open container prohibited. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Chauffeured limousine means a vehicle registered under ORC 4503.24. 
(2)  Street, highway and motor vehicle have the same meanings as in ORC 4511.01. 
(B)  No person shall have in the person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  In a State liquor store; 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (C) hereof, on the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control; 
(ORC 4301.62) 
(3)  In any other public place, including municipal parks, except on the premises of Partners Park, when authorized by the terms of a lawful permit issued by the City of Marysville pursuant to Chapter 110 or during a City sponsored event at which the beer or wine was lawfully purchased. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) hereof, while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking; 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) hereof, while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(C)  (1)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened container of any of the following: 
(a)  Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-2(f), A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-51, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7 or F-8 permit; 
(b)  Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on the premises of a farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit; 
(c)  Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a convention facility as provided in ORC 4303.201; 
(d)  Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission. 
(e)  Spirituous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample, as defined in ORC 4301.171. 
(2)  A person may have in the person's possession on an F liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the F permit is issued. As used in this section, music festival means a series of outdoor live musical performances, extending for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least forty acres. 
(3)  (a)  A person may have in the person's possession on a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued. 
(b)  As used in subsection (C)(3)(a) of this section: 
i.  Orchestral performance means a concert comprised of a group of not fewer than forty musicians playing various musical instruments. 
ii.  Outdoor performing arts center means an outdoor performing arts center that is located on not less than one hundred fifty acres of land and that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each year. 
(4)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in subsection (C)(3)(b)i. hereof if the person with supervision and control over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location. 
(5)  A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is attending either of the following: 
(a)  An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-9 permit is issued; 
(b)  An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than twenty-five other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit premises. 
As used in subsection (C)(5) hereof, orchestral performance has the same meaning as in subsection (C)(3)(b) of this section. 
(6)  (a)  A person may have in the person's possession on the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if both of the following apply: 
i.  The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and 
ii.  The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility; 
(b)  As used in subsection (C)(6)(a) of this section: 
i.  Racing event means a motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations. 
ii.  Outdoor motorsports facility means an outdoor racetrack to which all of the following apply: 
a.  It is two and four-tenths miles or more in length. 
b.  It is located on two hundred acres or more of land. 
c.  The primary business of the owner of the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events. 
d.  The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit is located on the property of the facility. 
(7)  (a)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an outdoor refreshment area created under ORC 4301.82, if the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a qualified permit holder to which both of the following apply: 
i.  The permit holder's premises is located within the outdoor refreshment area. 
ii.  The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor refreshment area designation. 
(b)  Subsection (C)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do either of the following: 
i.  Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere; 
ii.  Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under subsection (D) or (E) of this section. 
(8)  (a)  A person may have in the person's possession on the property of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply: 
i.  The market grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit premises; 
ii.  The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and the market has notified the Division of Liquor Control about the event in accordance with division (A)(3) of ORC 4303.208. 
(b)  As used in subsection (C)(8) of this section, market means a market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860. 
(D)  This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of the fee imposed for the use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged contract, or the guest of such a person, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine; 
(2)  The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator of the limousine is located; 
(3)  The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(E)  An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with. 
(2)  The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with subsection (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by the driver. 
(F)  (1)  Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under subsection (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply: 
(a)  The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking. 
(b)  The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(c)  The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle an opened container of beer or wine. 
(d)  The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle not more than either thirty-six ounces of beer or eighteen ounces of wine. 
(2)  The legislative authority of a municipal corporation or township may enact an ordinance or adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened container or beer or wine. 
(3)  As used in this section, commercial quadricycle means a vehicle that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that meets all of the following requirements: 
(a)  It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a bicycle. 
(b)  It has at least five seats for passengers. 
(c)  It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and the passengers. 
(d)  It is used for commercial purposes. 
(e)  It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner. 
(G)  This section does not apply to a person that has in the person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D liquor permit holder that is located in the market. 
As used in subsection (G) of this section, market means an establishment that: 
(1)  Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than fifty percent of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed under ORC Ch. 3717; 
(2)  Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than twenty-two thousand square feet; 
(3)  Hosts a farmer's market on each Saturday from April through December. 
(ORC 4301.62) 
(H)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4301.99(A)) 
(Ord. 13-15. Passed 3-26-2015.) 
Sec. 529.08. - Hours of sale or consumption. 
(A)  This rule shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor. 
(B)  No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1c, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G or I permit holder: 
(1)  From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(2)  On Sunday between the hours of one a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(3)  Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(C)  No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquid shall be sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-51, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, or D-7 permit holder: 
(1)  From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(2)  On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(3)  Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(D)  Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in subsection (B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (B), unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(E)  The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m. 
(OAC 4301:1-1-49) 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
Sec. 529.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 533. - OBSCENITY AND SEX OFFENSES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Complicity,  501.10; offensive conduct,  509.03; telephone harassment,  537.10; criminal trespass,  541.05. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law. 

Sec. 533.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Sexual conduct means vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete vaginal or anal intercourse. 
(B)  Sexual contact means any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying either person. 
(C)  Sexual activity means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both. 
(D)  Prostitute means a male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to another. 
(E)  Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any material or performance describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply: 
(1)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex. 
(2)  The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for juveniles. 
(3)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles. 
(F)  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible group, judged with reference to such group, any material or performance is obscene if any of the following apply: 
(1)  Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest; 
(2)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way which tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite; 
(3)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality; 
(4)  Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way which inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose; 
(5)  It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such interest is primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose. 
(G)  Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(H)  Nudity means the showing, representation or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(I)  Juvenile means an unmarried person under the age of eighteen. 
(J)  Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record, or tape, or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data storage device. 
(K)  Performance means any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
(L)  Spouse means a person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the following apply: 
(1)  When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement authorized by ORC 3103.06; 
(2)  During the pendency of an action between the parties for annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation; 
(3)  In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective date of the judgment for legal separation. 
(M)  Minor means a person under the age of eighteen years. 
(N)  Mental health client or patient has the same meaning as in ORC 2305.51. 
(O)  Mental health professional has the same meaning as in ORC 2305.115. 
(P)  Sado-masochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained. 
(ORC 2907.01) 
Sec. 533.02. - Presumption of knowledge; actual notice and defense. 
(A)  An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in selling materials or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by Section 533.11, is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance involved, if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents. 
(B)  Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in writing by the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction in which the person to whom the notice is directed does business. Such notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to juveniles and bear the date of such notice. 
(C)  Section 533.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of a theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the operator's or projectionist's place of employment, other than wages. 
(D)  (1)  Sections 533.11, 533.12(A) and 533.13 do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. 
(2)  Subsection (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of Section 533.11, 533.12 or 533.13, or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(3)  Subsection (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring information that is engaged in the violation of Section 533.11, 533.12 or 533.13, and that contains content that person has selected and introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over which that person exercises editorial control. 
(E)  An employer is not guilty of a violation of Section 533.11, 533.12, or 533.13 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of employee's or agent's employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following: 
(1)  With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct. 
(2)  The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or agent's conduct. 
(F)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under Section 533.11 or 533.13 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or another electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable, effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology. 
(G)  If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions are severable. 
(ORC 2907.35) 
Sec. 533.03. - Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor. 
(A)  No person, who is eighteen years of age or older, shall engage in sexual conduct with another, who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows the other person is thirteen years of age or older but less than sixteen years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct with a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender is four years older or more than the other person, or if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of ORC 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or former ORC 2907.12, unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2907.04) 
Sec. 533.04. - Sexual imposition. 
(A)  No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more persons to have sexual contact when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard. 
(2)  The offender knows that the other person's or one of the other person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired. 
(3)  The offender knows that the other person or one of the other persons submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact. 
(4)  The other person or one of the other persons is thirteen years of age or older but less than sixteen years of age, whether or not the offender knows the age of such person, and the offender is at least eighteen years of age and four or more years older than such other person. 
(5)  The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes. 
(B)  No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of ORC 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06 or 2907.12, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2907.06) 
Sec. 533.05. - Importuning. 
Editor's note- Former Section 533.05 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. Section 533.05 was identical to ORC 2907.07(B) which the Ohio Supreme Court held to be unconstitutional in State v. Thompson, 95 Ohio St. 3rd 264 (2002). 
Sec. 533.06. - Voyeurism. 
(A)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another. 
(B)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the other person in a state of nudity. 
(C)  No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism. 
(2)  A violation of subsection (A) hereof is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(3)  A violation of subsection (B) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(4)  A violation of subsection (C) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2907.08) 
Sec. 533.07. - Public indecency. 
(A)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront others, who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not members of the person's household: 
(1)  Expose the person's private parts; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides in the person's household: 
(1)  Engage in masturbation; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(4)  Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and shall be punished as provided in subsections (C)(2), (3), (4) and (5) of this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3) of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(4) of this section, a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(5)  A violation of subsection (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree unless the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section in which case the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(ORC 2907.09) 
Sec. 533.08. - Procuring. 
(A)  No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel; 
(2)  Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a prostitute. 
(B)  No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of premises, shall knowingly permit such premises to be used for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity for hire. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (C), procuring is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or otherwise involved in a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is under sixteen years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates subsection (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute's age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of subsection (B) of this section is under sixteen years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates subsection (B) of this section knows the prostitute's age, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or otherwise involved in a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is sixteen or seventeen years of age at the time of the violation or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of subsection (B) of this section is sixteen or seventeen years of age at the time of the violation, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(ORC 2907.23) 
Sec. 533.09. - Soliciting. 
(A)  No person shall solicit another who is eighteen years of age or older to engage with such other person in sexual activity for hire. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(C)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of this section, and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the person's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6) of ORC 4510.02. In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(D)  As used in this section, sexual activity for hire means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either such person. 
(ORC 2907.24) 
Sec. 533.091. - Loitering to engage in solicitation. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another; 
(2)  Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation; 
(3)  Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a stationary vehicle; 
(4)  If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which the offender is the passenger; 
(5)  Interfere with the free passage of another. 
(B)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4501.01. 
(2)  Public place means any of the following: 
(a)  A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility; 
(b)  A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place described in subsection (B)(2)(a) hereof; 
(c)  A place not described in subsection (B)(2)(a) or (b) hereof that is open to the public. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 2907.241) 
Sec. 533.10. - Prostitution. 
(A)  No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 2907.25) 
Sec. 533.11. - Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles. 
(A)  No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(2)  Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(3)  While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles. 
(B)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section, that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not obscene: 
(1)  The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile involved. 
(2)  The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or presented to the juvenile. 
(3)  The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth certificate, marriage license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the juvenile was eighteen years of age or over or married, and the person to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile was under the age of eighteen and unmarried. 
(C)  (1)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge or other proper person. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) hereof, mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section. 
(D)  (1)  A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles. 
(2)  A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies: 
(a)  The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile. 
(b)  The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information. 
(E)  If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions are severable. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to juveniles, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance involved is obscene, a violation of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2907.31) 
Sec. 533.12. - Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles. 
(A)  No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he is the parent, guardian or spouse of such juvenile; 
(2)  Furnish such juvenile with any identification or document purporting to show that such juvenile is eighteen years of age or over or married. 
(B)  No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he is eighteen years of age or over or married; 
(2)  Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he is eighteen years of age or over or married. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who violates subsection (B) hereof shall be adjudged an unruly child, with such disposition of the case as may be appropriate under ORC Ch. 2151. 
(ORC 2907.33) 
Sec. 533.13. - Displaying matter harmful to juveniles. 
(A)  No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general public. 
(B)  It is not a violation of subsection (A) hereof if the material in question is displayed by placing it behind blinder racks or similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(ORC 2907.311) 
Sec. 533.14. - Unlawful advertising of massage. 
(A)  No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual activity. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(C)  Nothing in this section prevents the legislative authority of a municipal corporation or township from enacting any regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section. 
(ORC 2927.17) 
Sec. 533.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 537. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Physical harm to persons defined,  501.01 (C), (E); fighting; provoking violent response,  509.03 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law. 

Sec. 537.01. - Negligent homicide. 
(A)  No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section 549.01. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2903.05) 
Sec. 537.02. - Vehicular homicide and manslaughter. 
(A)  No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways: 
(1)  (a)  Negligently; 
(b)  As the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this subsection applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in subsection (D) of this section. 
(2)  As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under ORC Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under ORC 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense. The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by ORC 2903.06(E). 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under ORC Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under ORC 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense. 
(C)  The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least fifteen days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Section 501.99. The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) hereof if either of the following applies: 
(1)  The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or ORC 2903.06 or 2903.08. 
(2)  At the time of the offense, the offender was driving under suspension or cancellation under ORC Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under ORC 4507.10. 
(D)  Subsection (A)(1)(b) does not apply in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in ORC 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under ORC 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in ORC 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the application of subsections (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) of this section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of those subsections in that construction zone. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Mandatory prison term and mandatory jail term have the same meanings as in ORC 2929.01. 
(2)  Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense means a violation of ORC 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section applies, a violation of ORC 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of ORC 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000. 
(3)  Construction zone has the same meaning as in ORC 5501.27. 
(4)  Speeding offense means a violation of ORC 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance pertaining to speed. 
(F)  For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this State, or current or former law of another state or the United States. 
(ORC 2903.06) 
(G)  The court imposing a sentence upon an offender for any violation of this section also shall impose a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (B) of ORC 4510.02 that is equivalent in length to the suspension required for a violation of ORC 2903.06 under similar circumstances. 
(ORC 4510.07) 
Sec. 537.021. - Vehicular assault in a construction zone. 
(A)  No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause serious physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense. This subsection applies only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in subsection (D) hereof. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular assault. Except as provided in this subsection, vehicular assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault is a felony if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension imposed under ORC Ch. 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of ORC 4510.02. 
(C)  The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Section 501.99. 
(D)  This section does not apply in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in ORC 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under ORC 5501.27. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Mandatory jail term has the same meaning as in ORC 2929.01. 
(2)  Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense has the same meaning as in ORC 2903.06. 
(3)  Construction zone has the same meaning as in ORC 5501.27. 
(4)  Speeding offense has the same meaning as in ORC 2903.06. 
(F)  For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this State, or current or former law of another state or the United States. 
(ORC 2903.08) 
Sec. 537.03. - Assault. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(B)  No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of assault, a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in subsection (C) hereof. If the assault was committed under the circumstances provided in subsection (C)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) or (9) hereof, assault is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the offense is committed by a caretaker against a functionally impaired person under the caretaker's care. 
(3)  If the offense occurs in or on the grounds of a State correctional institution or an institution of the Department of Youth Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction or the Department of Youth Services, and the offense is committed by a person incarcerated in the State correctional institution or by a person institutionalized in the Department of Youth Services Institution pursuant to a commitment to the Department of Youth Services. 
(4)  If the offense is committed in any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The offense occurs in or on the grounds of a local correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local correctional facility or a probation department or is on the premises of the facility for business purposes or as a visitor, and the offense is committed by a person who is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's arrest for any crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person's being charged with or convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person's being alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child. 
(b)  The offense occurs off the grounds of a State correctional institution and off the grounds of an institution of the Department of Youth Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, the Department of Youth Services, or a probation department, the offense occurs during the employee's official work hours and while the employee is engaged in official work responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person incarcerated in a State correctional institution or institutionalized in the Department of Youth Services who temporarily is outside of the institution for any purpose, by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control, under a community control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person under post-release control, or by an offender under any other type of supervision by a government agency. 
(c)  The offense occurs off the grounds of a local correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local correctional facility or a probation department, the offense occurs during the employee's official work hours and while the employee is engaged in official work responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person who is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's arrest for any crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person being charged with or convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person being alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child and who temporarily is outside of the facility for any purpose or by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control, under a community control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person under post-release control, or by an offender under any other type of supervision by a government agency. 
(d)  The victim of the offense is a school teacher or administrator or a school bus operator, and the offense occurs in a school, on school premises, in a school building, on a school bus or while the victim is outside of school premises or a school bus and is engaged in duties or official responsibilities associated with the victim's employment or position as a school teacher or administrator or a school bus operator, including, but not limited to, driving, accompanying, or chaperoning students at or on class or field trips, athletic events, or other school extracurricular activities or functions outside of school premises. 
(5)  If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, a firefighter, or a person performing emergency medical service, while in the performance of their official duties. 
(6)  If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation and if the victim suffered serious physical harm as a result of the commission of the offense. 
(7)  If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties. 
(8)  If the victim of the offense is a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital whom the offender knows or has reasonable cause to know is a health care professional of a hospital; a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital, if the victim is engaged in the performance of the victim's duties, and if the hospital offers de-escalation or crisis intervention training for such professionals, workers or officers, assault is one of the following: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(8)(b) of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding the fine specified in division (A)(2)(b) of ORC 2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing the offender under this subsection and if the court decides to impose a fine, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(b)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed against hospital personnel, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a felony. 
(9)  If the victim of the offense is a judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or employee whom the offender knows or has reasonable cause to know is a judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or employee, and if the victim is engaged in the performance of the victim's duties, assault is one of the following: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(9)(b) of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a misdemeanor of the first degree. In sentencing the offender under this subsection, if the court decides to impose a fine, notwithstanding the fine specified in division (A)(2)(b) of ORC 2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the first degree, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(b)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed against justice system personnel, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a felony. 
(10)  If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as described in ORC 2941.1423 that was included in the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in division (G) of ORC 2929.24. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Peace officer has the same meaning as in ORC 2935.01. 
(2)  Firefighter has the same meaning as in ORC 3937.41. 
(3)  Emergency medical service has the same meaning as in ORC 4765.01. 
(4)  Local correctional facility means a county, multicounty, municipal, municipal-county or multicounty-municipal jail or workhouse. A minimum security jail established under ORC 341.23 or 753.21, or another county, multicounty, municipal, municipal-county, or multicounty-municipal facility used for the custody of persons arrested for any crime or delinquent act, persons charged with or convicted of any crime, or persons alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child. 
(5)  Employee of a local correctional facility means a person who is an employee of the political subdivision or of one or more of the affiliated political subdivisions that operates the local correctional facility and who operates or assists in the operation of the facility. 
(6)  School teacher or administrator means either of the following: 
(a)  A person who is employed in the public schools of the State under a contract described in ORC 3311.77 or 3319.08 in a position in which the person is required to have a certificate issued pursuant to ORC 3319.22 to 3319.311. 
(b)  A person who is employed by a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07 and who is certified in accordance with ORC 3301.071. 
(7)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in ORC 2929.01. 
(8)  Escorted visit means an escorted visit granted under ORC 2967.27. 
(9)  Post-release control and transitional control have the same meanings as in ORC 2967.01. 
(10)  Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation has the same meaning as in ORC 2903.11. 
(11)  Health care professional and health care worker have the same meanings as in ORC 2305.234. 
(12)  Assault or homicide offense committed against hospital personnel means a violation of this section or ORC 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14 committed in circumstances in which all of the following apply: 
(a)  The victim of the offense was a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital or a security officer of a hospital. 
(b)  The offender knew or had reasonable cause to know that the victim was a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital; 
(c)  The victim was engaged in the performance of the victim's duties. 
(d)  The hospital offered de-escalation or crisis intervention training for such professionals, workers or officers. 
(13)  De-escalation or crisis intervention training means de-escalation or crisis intervention training for health care professionals of a hospital, health care workers of a hospital, and security officers of a hospital to facilitate interaction with patients, members of a patient's family, and visitors, including those with mental impairments. 
(14)  Assault or homicide offense committed against justice system personnel means a violation of this section or of ORC 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14 committed in circumstances in which the victim of the offense was a judge, magistrate, prosecutor, or court official or employee whom the offender knew or had reasonable cause to know was a judge, magistrate, prosecutor, or court official or employee, and the victim was engaged in the performance of the victim's duties. 
(15)  Court official or employee means any official or employee of a court created under the constitution or statutes of this State or of a United States court located in this State. 
(16)  Judge means a judge of a court created under the constitution or statutes of this State or of a United States court located in this State. 
(17)  Magistrate means an individual who is appointed by a court of record of this State and who has the powers and may perform the functions specified in Civil Rule 53, Criminal Rule 19, or Juvenile Rule 40, or an individual who is appointed by a United States court located in this State who has similar powers and functions. 
(18)  Prosecutor has the same meaning as in ORC 2935.01. 
(19)  (a)  Hospital means, subject to subsection (D)(19)(b) of this section, an institution classified as a hospital under ORC 3701.01 in which are provided to patients diagnostic, medical, surgical, obstetrical, psychiatric, or rehabilitation care or a hospital operated by a health maintenance organization. 
(b)  Hospital does not include any of the following: 
i.  A facility licensed under ORC Ch. 3721, a health care facility operated by the Department of Mental Health or the Department of Developmental Disabilities, a health maintenance organization that does not operate a hospital, or the office of any private, licensed health care professional, whether organized for individual or group practice; 
ii.  An institution for the sick that is operated exclusively for patients who use spiritual means for healing and for whom the acceptance of medical care is inconsistent with their religious beliefs, accredited by a national accrediting organization, exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501 of the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986", 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended, and providing twenty-four-hour nursing care pursuant to the exemption in division (E) of ORC 4723.32 from the licensing requirements of ORC Ch. 4723. 
(20)  Health maintenance organization has the same meaning as in ORC 3727.01. 
(ORC 2903.13) 
Sec. 537.04. - Negligent assault. 
(A)  No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section 549.01 cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 2903.14) 
Sec. 537.05. - Aggravated menacing. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (B), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(C)  As used in this section, organization includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
(ORC 2903.21) 
Sec. 537.051. - Menacing by stalking. 
(A)  (1)  No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person's family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other person's family or household member, the other person's belief or mental distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(2)  No person, through the use of any form of written communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, any computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or telecommunication device shall post a message or use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of the following: 
(a)  Violate subsection (A)(1) of this section; 
(b)  Urge or incite another to commit a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
(3)  No person, with sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by stalking. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (B)(2) and (3) of this section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Menacing by stalking is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if any of the following applies: 
(a)  The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a violation of Section 541.051. 
(b)  In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim. 
(c)  In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school. 
(d)  The victim of the offense is a minor. 
(e)  The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts toward the victim or any other person. 
(f)  While committing the offense under subsection (A)(1) of this section or a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section is based on conduct in violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section, the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control. Subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section does not apply in determining the penalty for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section or a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
(g)  At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was the subject of a protection order issued under ORC 2903.213 or 2903.214, regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim of the offense or another person. 
(h)  In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (A)(2) of this section, or an offense committed under subsection (A)(3) of this section based on a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or any personal property on that premises. 
(i)  Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness. 
(3)  If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities, or duties, menacing by stalking is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(C)  ORC 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a violation of this section. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Pattern of conduct means two or more actions or incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public official's, firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical services person's, or emergency facility person's official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or telecommunications device, may constitute a pattern of conduct . 
(2)  Mental distress means any of the following: 
(a)  Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary substantial incapacity; 
(b)  Any mental illness or condition that would normally require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services. 
(3)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of emergency medical services personnel as defined in ORC 2133.21. 
(4)  Emergency facility person is the singular of emergency facility personnel as defined in ORC 2909.04. 
(5)  Public official has the same meaning as in ORC 2921.01. 
(6)  Computer , computer network , computer program , computer system and telecommunications device have the same meanings as in ORC 2913.01. 
(7)  Post a message means transferring, sending, posting, publishing, disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communication, any message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether done under one's own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating another. 
(8)  Third person means, in relation to conduct as described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of the conduct. 
(9)  Sexual motivation has the same meaning as in ORC 2971.01. 
(10)  Organization includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
(11)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
(a)  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(1) of this section is committed: 
i.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of the person; 
ii.  A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person; 
iii.  A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person. 
(b)  The natural parent of any child of whom the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(1) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(12)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(1) of this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
(E)  The Municipality does not need to prove in a prosecution under this section that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to show that the person was caused mental distress as described in subsection (D)(2)(b) of this section. 
(F)  (1)  This section does not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section. 
(2)  Subsection (F)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Subsection (F)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(ORC 2903.211) 
Sec. 537.06. - Menacing. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediately family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (B), menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(C)  As used in this section, organization includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
(ORC 2903.22) 
Sec. 537.07. - Endangering children. 
(A)  No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under eighteen years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one years of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child, by violating a duty of care, protection or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care, protection or support under this subsection when the parent, guardian, custodian or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical or mental illness or defect of the child by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body. 
(B)  No person shall abuse a child under eighteen years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one years of age. 
(C)  (1)  No person shall operate a vehicle in violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code when one or more children under eighteen years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of subsection (C) hereof and a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (C) hereof. For purposes of ORC 4511.191 to 4511.197 and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of subsection (C) hereof shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. 
(2)  As used in subsection (C) hereof: 
(a)  Controlled substance has the same meaning as in ORC 3719.01. 
(b)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4511.01. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children. 
(1)  Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved, or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section, ORC 2919.22 or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, endangering children is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Endangering children is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if either of the following applies: 
(a)  The violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved or the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under ORC 2919.22 or any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of, or physical abuse of a child. 
(b)  The violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved and the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of ORC 2919.22(C) or subsection (C) hereof, ORC 2903.06, or 2903.08, Section 2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or ORC 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section. 
(3)  In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (D)(2) hereof, or pursuant to any other provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender any of the sanctions provided under ORC 2919.22(E)(5)(d). 
(E)  (1)  If a person violates subsection (C) hereof and if, at the time of the violation, there were two or more children under eighteen years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a violation of subsection (C) hereof for each of the children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations. 
(2)  (a)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (C) hereof but the person is not also convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (C) hereof, both of the following apply: 
i.  For purposes of the provisions of the Traffic Code penalty that set forth the penalties and sanctions for a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (C) hereof shall not constitute a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code. 
ii.  For purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code and that is not described in subsection (E)(2)(a)i. hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (C) hereof shall constitute a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code. 
(b)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (C) hereof and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (C) hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (C) hereof shall not constitute, for purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code, a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(A) of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 2919.22) 
Sec. 537.08. - Unlawful restraint. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(B)  No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(D)  As used in this section, sexual motivation has the same meaning as in ORC 2971.01. 
(ORC 2905.03) 
Sec. 537.09. - Coercion. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Threaten to commit any offense; 
(2)  Utter or threaten any calumny against any person; 
(3)  Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, to damage any person's personal or business repute, or to impair any person's credit; 
(4)  Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person; 
(5)  Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld. 
(B)  Subsections (A)(4) and (5) hereof shall not be construed to prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith and in the interest of justice: 
(1)  Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from prosecution pursuant to ORC 2945.44; 
(2)  In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification of sentence; 
(3)  Imposing community control sanction on certain conditions, including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim of the offense. 
(C)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A)(3), (4) or (5) hereof that the actor's conduct was a reasonable response to the circumstances that occasioned it, and that the actor's purpose was limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from further misconduct; 
(2)  Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice; 
(3)  Preventing another from taking action for which the actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified; 
(4)  Compelling another to take action that the actor reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Threat includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo. 
(2)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in ORC 2929.01. 
(ORC 2905.12) 
Sec. 537.10. - Telecommunication harassment. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or knowingly permit telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the caller does any of the following: 
(1)  Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or abuse, any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a recipient; 
(2)  Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made; 
(3)  During the telecommunication, violates ORC 2903.21; 
(4)  Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged; 
(5)  Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a telecommunication to those premises or to any person at those premises. 
(6)  Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten or harass the recipient; 
(7)  Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the telecommunication service of any person; 
(8)  Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety, any file, document or other communication that prevents that person from using the person's telephone service or electronic communication device; 
(9)  Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient; 
(10)  Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person; 
(11)  Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner. 
(B)  (1)  No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another person. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing, threatening, or harassing another person. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunication harassment. 
(2)  A violation of subsections (A)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), or (11) or (B) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. Each subsequent offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(4) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense. For each subsequent offense or if a violation of subsection (A)(4) hereof results in economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, a violation of subsection (A)(4) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this State against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunication service, interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, or an officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, of information service, is immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. 
(E)  (1)  This section does not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electric method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section. 
(2)  Subsection (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Subsection (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(4)  A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or development of information provided by another information content provider, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or created any content in violation of this section. 
(F)  Subsections (A)(5) to (11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting, compiling, editing or disseminating information for the general public, within the scope of the person's employment in that capacity or the person's contractual authority in that capacity. 
(G)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Economic harm means all direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct. Economic harm includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
(a)  All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct; 
(b)  The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct; 
(c)  The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; 
(d)  The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct. 
(2)  Caller means the person described in subsection (A) hereof who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that person's control. 
(3)  Telecommunication and telecommunications device have the same meanings as in ORC 2913.01. 
(4)  Sexual activity has the same meaning as in ORC 2907.01. 
(5)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
(a)  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed: 
i.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of the recipient; 
ii.  A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient; 
iii.  A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or anther person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient. 
(b)  The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(6)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
(7)  Cable operator has the same meaning as in ORC 1332.21. 
(H)  Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a telecommunication call to a debtor that is in compliance with the "Fair Debt Collection Practices Act", 91 Stat. 874 (1977), 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or the "Telephone Consumer Protection Act", 105 Stat. 2395 (1991), 47 U.S.C. 227, as amended. 
(ORC 2917.21) 
Sec. 537.11. - Threatening or harassing telephone calls. 
Editor's note- Former ORC 4931.31 from which Section 537.11 was derived was repealed by Senate Bill 162, effective September 13, 2010. See now Section 537.10, "telecommunication harassment". 
Sec. 537.12. - Misuse of 9-1-1 system. 
(A)  9-1-1 system means a system through which individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1. 
(ORC 128.01) 
(B)  No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of the 9-1-1 system established under ORC Ch. 128 to report an emergency if he knows that no emergency exists. 
(C)  No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than obtaining emergency service. 
(D)  No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the data base that serves the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under ORC Ch. 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system; 
(2)  For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency service provider; 
(3)  In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such information due solely to technology of the wireline telephone network portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the data base to be restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point; 
(4)  In the circumstance of access to a data base being given by a telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a public utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a data base shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the steering committee. 
(5)  In the circumstance of access to a data base given by a telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the steering committee. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for the purpose of access to a data base is subject to the jurisdiction of the steering committee. 
(ORC 128.32) 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (C) or (D) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. For each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 128.99) 
Sec. 537.13. - Adulterating of or furnishing adulterated food or confection. 
(A)  No person shall do either of the following, knowingly or having reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby: 
(1)  Place a pin, needle, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection; 
(2)  Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been adulterated in violation of subsection (A)(1) hereof. 
(ORC 3716.11) 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 3716.99(C)) 
Sec. 537.14. - Domestic violence. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a family or household member. 
(B)  No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or household member. 
(C)  No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm to the family or household member. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(3) to (5) of this section, a violation of subsection (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(4) of this section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially similar to domestic violence, a violation of ORC 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially similar to any of those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(4)  If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in subsection (D)(3) of this section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(3) or (4) of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law, and a violation of subsection (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(E)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit of local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person violated this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
(a)  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the offender: 
i.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse or a former spouse of the offender; 
ii.  A parent, a foster parent or a child of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender; 
iii.  A parent, or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the offender; or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the offender. 
(b)  The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(2)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
(ORC 2919.25) 
(G)  The same relief available under the Ohio Revised Code for filing a complaint for violation of ORC 2919.25 shall be available for filing a complaint for violation of this section. 
Sec. 537.15. - Temporary protection order. 
(A)  No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following: 
(1)  A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to ORC 2919.26 or 3113.31; 
(2)  A protection order issued pursuant to ORC 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214; 
(3)  A protection order issued by a court of another state. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a protection order. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Violating a protection order is a felony and shall be prosecuted under State law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following: 
(a)  A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to ORC 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31; 
(b)  Two or more violations of ORC 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or 2911.211 or any combination of those offenses that involved the same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent agreement; 
(c)  One or more violations of this section. 
(4)  If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(5)  If the protection order violated by the offender was an order issued pursuant to ORC 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this subsection that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the court determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under ORC 2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to ORC 2743.191. The total amount paid from the reparations fund created pursuant to ORC 2743.191 for electronic monitoring under this section and ORC 2151.34 and 2903.214 shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars per year. 
(C)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A)(3) of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a protection order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this State or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265(c). 
(D)  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement. 
(E)  As used in this section, protection order issued by a court of another state means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to another person, including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking protection. Protection order issued by a court of another state does not include an order for support or for custody of a child. 
(ORC 2919.27) 
Sec. 537.16. - Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternate nicotine products. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Age verification means a service provided by an independent third party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is eighteen years of age or older. 
(2)  (a)  Alternative nicotine product means, subject to subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section, an electronic cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means, including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving or inhaling. 
(b)  Alternative nicotine product does not include any of the following: 
i.  Any cigarette or other tobacco product; 
ii.  Any product that is a drug as that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1); 
iii.  Any product that is a device as that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(h); 
iv.  Any product that is a combination product as described in 21 U.S.C. 353(g). 
(3)  Child has the same meaning as in ORC 2151.011. 
(4)  Cigarette includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes. 
(5)  Distribute means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes. 
(6)  (a)  Electronic cigarette means, subject to subsection (A)(6)(b) of this section, any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic pipe. 
(b)  Electronic cigarette does not include any item, product or device described in subsections (A)(2)(b)i. to iv. of this section. 
(7)  Proof of age means a driver's license, a commercial driver's license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued under ORC 4507.50-4507.52 that shows that a person is eighteen years of age or older. 
(8)  Tobacco product means any product that is made from tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff. 
(9)  Vending machine has the same meaning as coin machine in ORC 2913.01. 
(B)  No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to any child; 
(2)  Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under eighteen years of age is prohibited by law; 
(3)  Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes for that child; 
(4)  Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack or other container of cigarettes containing fewer than twenty cigarettes or any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco; 
(5)  Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer; 
(6)  Give, sell or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age verification. 
(C)  No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except in the following locations: 
(1)  An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not open to the general public; 
(2)  An area to which children are not generally permitted access; 
(3)  Any other place not identified in subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section, upon all of the following conditions: 
(a)  The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product and alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway or outer-waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person. 
(b)  The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place is closed. 
(D)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection (B)(1) of this section: 
(1)  The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is eighteen years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child. 
(2)  The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a child under subsection (B)(1) of this section is a parent, spouse who is eighteen years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child. 
(E)  It is not a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes while the child is participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol; 
(2)  An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol; 
(3)  The child is participating in the research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research protocol. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (C) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (C) of this section, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (B)(3) of this section is guilty of permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (B)(3) of this section, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(G)  Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold or otherwise distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are used, possessed, purchased or received by a child in violation of ORC 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under ORC Ch. 2981. 
(ORC 2927.02) 
Sec. 537.17. - Criminal child enticement. 
(A)  No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall knowingly solicit, coax, entice or lure any child under fourteen years of age to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle, or onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the parent, guardian or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the activity; 
(2)  The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of any Board of Education, or the actor is any of such persons, but, at the time the actor undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the actor's lawful duties in that capacity. 
(B)  No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to, that proscribed by subsection (A) of this section, shall engage in any activity described in subsection (A) of this section. 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A) hereof that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety or welfare of the child. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section or ORC 2905.05, 2907.02, or 2907.03, or former Section 2907.12, or ORC 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under seventeen years of age at the time of the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Sexual motivation has the same meaning as in ORC 2971.01. 
(2)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4501.01. 
(3)  Vessel has the same meaning as in ORC 1546.01. 
(ORC 2905.05) 
Sec. 537.18. - Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Delinquent child has the same meaning as in ORC 2152.02. 
(2)  Unruly child has the same meaning as in ORC 2151.022. 
(B)  No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child; 
(2)  Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child; 
(3)  Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a delinquent child based on the child's violation of a court order adjudicating the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant; 
(4)  If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who has the duties under ORC Chs. 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence address and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not emancipated, as defined in ORC 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child complies with those duties under ORC Chs. 2152 and 2950. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of violation of this section is a separate offense. 
(ORC 2919.24) 
Sec. 537.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 541. - PROPERTY OFFENSES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Physical harm to property defined,  501.01(D), (F) reimbursement for investigation or prosecution costs,  501.99(A); damage to sidewalks,  521.04; vehicle trespass,  545.06. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; parents' liability for destructive acts of their children, ORC 3109.09. 

Sec. 541.01. - Determining property value in arson. 
(A)  The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of Section 541.02. 
(1)  If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss. 
(2)  If the property is not covered under subsection (A)(1) hereof, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is the reasonable cost of restoring the property. 
(3)  If the property is not covered under subsection (A)(1) hereof, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property immediately before and immediately after the offense. 
(B)  As used in this section, fair market value has the same meaning as in Section 545.02(C)(3). 
(C)  Prima-facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Section 545.02(D) may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this section. 
(ORC 2909.11) 
Sec. 541.02. - Arson. 
(A)  No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent. 
(B)  (1)  No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any structure of another that is not an occupied structure; 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (B)(1) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or the amount of physical harm involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, arson is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2909.03) 
Sec. 541.03. - Criminal damaging or endangering. 
(A)  No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without his consent: 
(1)  Knowingly, by any means; 
(2)  Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently dangerous agency or substance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor if the property involved is not an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation does not create a risk of physical harm to any person, and if the property involved is not an occupied aircraft. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2909.06) 
Sec. 541.04. - Criminal mischief. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with either of the following: 
(a)  The property of another; 
(b)  One's own residential real property with the purpose to decrease the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the following apply: 
i.  The residential real property is subject to a mortgage. 
ii.  The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real property. As used in this subsection, pending includes the time between judgment entry and confirmation of sale. 
(2)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of another employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm; 
(3)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station, boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker. 
(4)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its intended purpose; 
(5)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that is on that land. 
(6)  Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program, all as defined in ORC 2909.01, knowingly do any of the following: 
(a)  In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program; 
(b)  Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer program. 
(B)  As used in this section, safety device means any fire extinguisher, fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of danger, or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and shall be punished as provided in subsection (C)(2) or (3) of this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved in the violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the violation is one thousand dollars or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section is used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2909.07) 
Sec. 541.05. - Criminal trespass. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another; 
(2)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard; 
(3)  Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict access; 
(4)  Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or premises involved was owned, controlled or in custody of a public agency. 
(C)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved when such authorization was secured by deception. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Notwithstanding Section 501.99, if the person, in committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 
(3)  If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or state law, and the offender, in committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less than sixty days. In such a case, ORC 4519.47 applies. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  All-purpose vehicle, off-highway motorcycle and snowmobile have the same meaning as in Section 375.01 of the Traffic Code. 
(2)  Land or premises includes any land, building, structure, or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof. 
(ORC 2911.21) 
Sec. 541.051. - Aggravated trespass. 
(A)  No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2911.211) 
Sec. 541.06. - Destruction of shrubs, trees or crops. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down, destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land. 
(B)  In addition to any penalty provided, whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury caused. 
(ORC 901.51) 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 901.99(A)) 
Sec. 541.07. - Desecration. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage, pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following: 
(1)  The flag of the United States or of this State; 
(2)  Any public monument; 
(3)  Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or archeological interest; 
(4)  A work of art or museum piece; 
(5)  Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(C)  As used in this section, cemetery means any place of burial and includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with or containing American Indian human remains. 
(ORC 2927.11) 
Sec. 541.08. - Ethnic intimidation. 
(A)  No person shall violate ORC 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, 2909.07 or 2917.21(A)(3) to (5) or Sections 537.05, 537.06, 537.10(A)(3) to (5), 541.03 or 541.04 of the General Offenses Code by reason of the race, color, religion or national origin of another person or group of persons. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. 
(ORC 2927.12) 
Sec. 541.09. - Posting bills. 
(A)  No person shall paint, print, paste, stencil or otherwise mark, place upon or affix to a building, fence, wall or tree without the consent of the owner thereof, a word, letter, character, figure, sentence or device, or a handbill or notice. 
(B)  This section does not apply to the posting of a handbill or notice of public sale by a sheriff, administrator, executor or licensed auctioneer, or a notice required by law to be posted. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 18. Passed 4-2-03.) 
Sec. 541.10. - Vehicular vandalism. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Highway means any highway as defined in Section 301.42 of the Traffic Code or any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass. 
(2)  Alley , street , and vehicle have the same meanings as in Chapter 301 of the Traffic Code. 
(3)  Vessel and waters in this State have the same meanings as in ORC 1546.01. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle on a highway; 
(2)  Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this State that are located in the Municipality. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this section creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, serious physical harm to property, physical harm to any person or serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2909.09) 
Sec. 541.11. - Trespass on a place of public amusement. 
(A)  As used in this section, place of public amusement means a stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of whether admission is charged. 
(B)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in subsection (D)(1) of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement. 
(C)  An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This subsection does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement. 
(D)  (1)  Notice has been given that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this subsection, regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following means: 
(a)  By notifying the person personally, either orally or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is restricted; 
(b)  By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the public place of amusement is restricted. 
(2)  If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in subsection (D)(1) of this section, the Municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of subsection (B) of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement. 
(E)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (E)(1) of this section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform not less than thirty and not more than one hundred twenty hours of supervised community service work. 
(ORC 2911.23) 
Sec. 541.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 545. - THEFT AND FRAUD[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Property defined,  501.01(J); cheating,  517.05; falsification,  525.02; impersonating a public servant,  525.03. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law. 

Sec. 545.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires that a term be given a different meaning: 
(A)  Deception means knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be deceived, by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact. 
(B)  Defraud means to knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another. 
(C)  Deprive means to do any of the following: 
(1)  Withhold property of another permanently, or for such period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration; 
(2)  Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will recover it; 
(3)  Accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper consideration. 
(D)  Owner means, unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful. 
(E)  Services include labor, personal services, professional services, rental services, public utility services, including wireless service as defined in ORC 5507.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation, entertainment and cable television services. 
(F)  Writing means any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written, typewritten or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge, trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or identification. 
(G)  Forge means to fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not authenticated by that conduct. 
(H)  Utter means to issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation, deliver or display. 
(I)  Coin machine means any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the following: 
(1)  Receive a coin, bill, or token made for that purpose; 
(2)  In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license. 
(J)  Slug means an object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose. 
(K)  Theft offense means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of ORC 2911.01,2911.02, 2911.11,2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42 to 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, 2913.51, 2915.05, 2915.06 or 2921.41. 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (K)(1) hereof or a violation of ORC 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under subsection (K)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(L)  Computer services includes, but is not limited to, the use of a computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network. 
(M)  Computer means an electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. Computer includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing, storage, computer program or communication facilities that are connected or related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature. 
(N)  Computer system means a computer and related devices, whether connected or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and storage devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing tasks. 
(O)  Computer network means a set of related and remotely connected computers and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication facilities through the use of computer facilities. 
(P)  Computer program means an ordered set of data representing coded instructions or statements that when executed by a computer cause the computer to process data. 
(Q)  Computer software means computer programs, procedures and other documentation associated with the operation of a computer system. 
(R)  Data means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network. For purposes of Section 545.07, data has the additional meaning set forth in subsection (A) of that section. 
(S)  Cable television service means any services provided by or through the facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system. 
(T)  Gain access means to approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer, computer system or computer network. 
(U)  Credit card includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a cash dispensing machine. 
(V)  Electronic fund transfer has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15 U.S.C.A. 1693a, as amended. 
(W)  Rented property means personal property in which the right of possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the property, within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of consideration generally is determined by the duration of possession of the property. 
(X)  Telecommunication means the origination, emission, dissemination, transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence or any nature over any communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or analog method. 
(Y)  Telecommunications device means any instrument, equipment, machine, or other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem. 
(Z)  Telecommunications service means the providing, allowing, facilitating, or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a telecommunications device over a telecommunications system. 
(AA)  Counterfeit telecommunications device means a telecommunications device that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications service or information service. Counterfeit telecommunications device includes, but is not limited to, a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone. 
(BB)  (1)  Information service means, subject to subsection (BB)(2) hereof, the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications, including, but not limited to, electronic publishing. 
(2)  Information service does not include any use of a capability of a type described in subsection (BB)(1) hereof for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service. 
(CC)  Elderly person means a person who is sixty-five years of age or older. 
(DD)  Disabled adult means a person who is eighteen years of age or older and has some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unfit to work at any substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of at least twelve months without any present indication of recovery from the impairment, or who is eighteen years of age or older and has been certified as permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this State or the United States that has the function of so classifying persons. 
(EE)  Firearm and dangerous ordnance have the same meanings as in ORC 2923.11. 
(FF)  Motor vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4501.01. 
(GG)  Dangerous drug has the same meaning as in ORC 4729.01. 
(HH)  Drug abuse offense has the same meaning as in ORC 2925.01. 
(II)  Police dog or horse has the same meaning as in ORC 2921.321. 
(JJ)  Anhydrous ammonia is a compound formed by the combination of two gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described in this subsection. Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is approximately eighty-two per cent nitrogen to eighteen per cent hydrogen. 
(KK)  Assistance dog has the same meaning as in ORC 955.011. 
(LL)  Active duty service member means any member of the armed forces of the United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code. 
(ORC 2913.01) 
Sec. 545.02. - Determining property value in theft offense. 
(A)  If more than one item of property or service is involved in a theft offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property or services involved in the offense. 
(B)  (1)  When a series of offenses under Section 545.05, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 545.05, 545.06, or 545.08, 545.10(B)(1) or (2), or Sections 545.15 or 545.20 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, is committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under Section 545.05, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 545.05 or 545.15 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member is committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series. 
(2)  If an offender commits a series of offenses under Section 545.05 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 545.05, 545.06 or 545.08, Sections 545.10(B)(1) or (2), or Sections 545.15 or 545.20, whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 545.05 or 545.15, whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct. 
(3)  In prosecuting a single offense under subsection (B)(1) or (2), it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses in the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in subsection (B)(1) of this section or that involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. While it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under subsection (B)(1) or (2) hereof, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution. 
(C)  The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or services involved in a theft offense: 
(1)  The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic worth to its owner and that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss. 
(2)  The value of personal effects and household goods, and of materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business, trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered under subsection (C)(1) hereof, and which retains substantial utility for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind and quality. 
(3)  The value of any real or personal property that is not covered under subsections (C)(1) or (2) hereof, and the value of services, is the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section, fair market value is the money consideration that a buyer would give and a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to act. 
(D)  Without limitation on the evidence that may be used to establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense: 
(1)  When the property involved is personal property held for sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima-facie evidence of its value. 
(2)  When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price, given in the latest market quotation prior to the offense, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity. 
(3)  When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest local market price prior to the offense is prima-facie evidence of the value of the livestock, poultry or products. 
(4)  When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face value is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(5)  When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive the property, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(6)  When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of the property or services that may be received by the instrument, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(7)  When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone, transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by law, the duly established rate is prima-facie evidence of the value of the services. 
(8)  When the services involved are services for which the rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima-facie evidence of the value of the services. 
(ORC 2913.61) 
Sec. 545.03. - Property exceptions as felony offense. 
Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether the offender has previously been convicted of a theft offense, the provisions of Sections 545.05 or 545.18 do not apply if the property involved is any of the following: 
(A)  A credit card; 
(B)  A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank; 
(C)  A firearm or dangerous ordnance as defined in ORC 2923.11; 
(D)  A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by ORC 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed by ORC 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard or sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States; 
(E)  A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by ORC 4505.07; 
(F)  A blank form for any license listed in ORC 4507.01(A). 
(ORC 2913.71) 
Sec. 545.04. - Detention of shoplifters; rights of museums and libraries. 
(A)  A merchant, or his employee or agent, who has probable cause to believe that items offered for sale by a mercantile establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (C) hereof, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity. 
(B)  Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (C) hereof or for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person has acted in a manner described in subsections (B)(1) and (2) hereof, detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the immediate vicinity of the library, museum or archival institution, if the officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has either: 
(1)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged, destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or 
(2)  With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat. 
(C)  An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival institution pursuant to subsection (B) hereof or a merchant or his employee or agent pursuant to subsection (A) hereof may detain another person for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief or theft; 
(2)  To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer; 
(3)  To obtain a warrant of arrest. 
(4)  To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of this General Offenses or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution or merchant. 
(D)  The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival institution, or the merchant or his employee or agent acting under subsection (A) or (B) hereof shall not search the person, search or seize any property belonging to the person detained without the person's consent, or use undue restraint upon the person detained. 
(E)  Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that he has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in subsection (B)(1) or (2) hereof or that he has probable cause to believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment. An arrest under this subsection shall be made within a reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Archival institution means any public or private building, structure or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the materials. 
(2)  Museum means any public or private nonprofit institution that is permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the public the objects or items. 
(3)  Pretrial diversion program means a rehabilitative, educational program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this State. 
(ORC 2935.041) 
Sec. 545.05. - Petty theft. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in any of the following ways: 
(1)  Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(2)  Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(3)  By deception; 
(4)  By threat; 
(5)  By intimidation. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of petty theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Petty theft is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  The value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, 
(3)  The property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, 
(4)  The property stolen is a motor vehicle, 
(5)  The property stolen is any dangerous drug, 
(6)  The property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, 
(7)  The property stolen is anhydrous ammonia, or 
(8)  The property stolen is a special purpose article as defined in ORC 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in ORC 4737.012. 
(C)  In addition to the penalties described in subsection (B) of this section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court may do one of the following: 
(1)  Unless subsection (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not more than six months the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege; 
(2)  If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section, impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in ORC 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be for at least six months. 
(3)  The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to subsections (C)(1) or (2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(D)  In addition to the penalties described in subsection (B) hereof, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution pursuant to ORC 2929.18 or 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented. Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of ORC 2913.72. 
(E)  The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or nonresident operating privilege under subsection (C) of this section may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in accordance with ORC Ch. 4510. 
(ORC 2913.02) 
Sec. 545.06. - Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(B)  This section does not apply to property removed from the State or if possession is kept for more than forty-eight hours. 
(C)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section: 
(1)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken, reasonably believed that the actor was authorized to use or operate the property. 
(2)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to use or operate the property. 
(D)  No person shall knowingly enter into or upon a motor vehicle, motorcycle or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(E)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of unauthorized use of a vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of subsection (A) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.03) 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of vehicle trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
Sec. 545.07. - Insurance fraud. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Data has the same meaning as in Section 545.01 and additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner. 
(2)  Deceptive means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information or by any other conduct, act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other objective or subjective fact. 
(3)  Insurer means any person that is authorized to engage in the business of insurance in this State under Title XXXIX of the Ohio Revised Code; The Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting Association created under ORC 3929.43; any health insuring corporation; and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or members. 
(4)  Policy means a policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by an insurer. 
(5)  Statement includes, but is not limited to, any notice, letter or memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice, account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental chart or other record; X-Ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result; other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and data in any form. 
(B)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive; 
(2)  Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, insurance fraud is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify ORC 2317.02(A). 
(ORC 2913.47) 
Sec. 545.08. - Unauthorized use of property. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(B)  The affirmative defenses contained in Section 545.06(C) are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of property. Except as provided in subsection (D) hereof, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(D)  If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Unauthorized use of property is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  Unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, and if the value of the property is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; or 
(2)  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult. 
(ORC 2913.04) 
Sec. 545.09. - Passing bad checks. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Check includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account, including, but not limited to any of the following: 
(a)  A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument; 
(b)  An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form of automated clearing house transaction. 
(2)  Issue a check means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account. 
(B)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument. 
(C)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored, if either of the following occurs: 
(1)  The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of issue or the stated date, whichever is later. 
(2)  The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within thirty days after issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor. 
(D)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to defraud if the drawer fails to comply with ORC 1349.16 by doing any of the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family or household purposes at a financial institution: 
(1)  Falsely stating that the drawer has not been issued a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued under ORC 4507.50; 
(2)  Furnishing such license or card, or another identification document that contains false information; 
(3)  Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the financial institution. 
(E)  In determining the value of the payment for purposes of subsection (F) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or transferred in violation of subsection (A) of this section within a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person for the payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more or if the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, passing bad checks is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.11) 
Sec. 545.10. - Misuse of credit cards. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon; 
(2)  Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than the issuer. 
(B)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt; 
(2)  Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in violation of law; 
(3)  Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law; 
(4)  Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation is false. 
(C)  No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive, possess, control or dispose of a credit card. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Misuse of credit cards is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  The cumulative retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations of subsection (B)(2), (3) or (4) hereof, which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of ninety consecutive days commencing on the date of the first violation, is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; or 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and the offense involves a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (2) hereof. 
(ORC 2913.21) 
Sec. 545.11. - Making or using slugs. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to defraud; 
(2)  Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 2913.33) 
Sec. 545.12. - Tampering with coin machines. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument into any coin machine. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of ORC 2911.32 or of any theft offense, tampering with coin machines is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2911.32) 
Sec. 545.13. - Criminal simulation. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in fact possess; 
(2)  Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape; 
(3)  Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under ORC Chs. 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under ORC Chs. 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under ORC Chs. 4301 and 4303. 
(4)  Utter, or possess with purpose to utter, any object that the person knows to have been simulated as provided in subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the loss to the victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, criminal simulation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.32) 
Sec. 545.14. - Tampering with records. 
(A)  No person, knowing the person has no privilege to do so, and with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record; 
(2)  Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with as provided in subsection (A)(1) hereof. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation involves data or computer software the value of which or loss to the victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the offense, tampering with records is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.42) 
Sec. 545.15. - Securing writings by deception. 
(A)  No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is incurred. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by deception, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Securing writings by deception is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  The value of the property or obligation involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; or 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member. 
(ORC 2913.43) 
Sec. 545.16. - Personating an officer. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he is facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector, investigator or agent of any governmental agency. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2913.44) 
Sec. 545.17. - Defrauding creditors. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of the person's creditors, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with any of the person's property. 
(2)  Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to administer or manage the person's affairs or estate, the existence, amount or location of any of the person's property, or any other information regarding such property that the person is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, defrauding creditors is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.45) 
Sec. 545.18. - Receiving stolen property. 
(A)  No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been obtained through commission of a theft offense. 
(B)  It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a theft offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Receiving stolen property is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  The value of the property involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; or 
(2)  The property involved is: 
(a)  Listed in Section 545.03; or 
(b)  A motor vehicle as defined in ORC 4501.01; or 
(c)  A dangerous drug as defined in ORC 4729.01. 
(d)  A special purchase article as defined in ORC 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in ORC 4737.012. 
(ORC 2913.51) 
Sec. 545.19. - Possession of criminal tools. 
(A)  No person shall possess or have under the person's control any substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally. 
(B)  Each of the following constitutes prima-facie evidence of criminal purpose: 
(1)  Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials or parts for making dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials, or parts are intended for legitimate use; 
(2)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article designed or specially adapted for criminal use; 
(3)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2923.24) 
Sec. 545.20. - Forgery of identification cards. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly do either of the following: 
(1)  Forge an identification card; 
(2)  Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an identification card, knowing it to have been forged. 
(3)  As used in this section, identification card means a card that includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether the words identity, identification, identification card or other similar words appear on the card. 
(B)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, forging or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or ORC 2913.31 (B), forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(ORC 2913.31) 
Sec. 545.21. - Possession of municipal property. 
(A)  No person, without being authorized, shall have in his control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to the Municipality. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 785-67. Passed 11-30-1967.) 
Sec. 545.22. - Identity fraud. 
Editor's note- Former Section 545.22 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. ORC 2913.49, from which Section 545.22 was derived, has been reclassified from a misdemeanor to a felony offense. 
Sec. 545.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 549. - WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Hunting prohibited,  505.11; Reporting gunshot and stab wounds,  525.05(B); Property destruction by tear gas device, etc.,  541.04. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, ORC 2923.18. 

Sec. 549.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Deadly weapon means any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried or used as a weapon. 
(B)  (1)  Firearm means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. Firearm includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable. 
(2)  When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual exercising control over the firearm. 
(C)  Handgun means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand; 
(2)  Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described in subsection (C)(1) of this section can be assembled. 
(D)  Semi-automatic firearm means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger. 
(E)  Automatic firearm means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger. 
(F)  Sawed-off firearm means a shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen inches long, or a rifle with a barrel less than sixteen inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than twenty-six inches long overall. 
(G)  Zip-gun means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture; 
(2)  Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, that is not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm; 
(3)  Any industrial tool, signalling device or safety device, that is not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when possessed, carried or used as a firearm. 
(H)  Explosive device means any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. Explosive device includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode. 
(I)  Incendiary device means any firebomb, and any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite it. 
(J)  Ballistic knife means a knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
(K)  Dangerous ordnance means any of the following, except as provided in subsection (1) hereof: 
(1)  Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife; 
(2)  Any explosive device or incendiary device; 
(3)  Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT, picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating or demolitions; 
(4)  Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon; 
(5)  Any firearm muffler or suppressor; 
(6)  Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance. 
(L)  Dangerous ordnance does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with black powder; 
(2)  Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the ammunition for that weapon unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off firearm; 
(3)  Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for use only with black powder; 
(4)  Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection (L)(3) hereof during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition; 
(5)  Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir, curio or museum piece. 
(6)  Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968," 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act. 
(M)  Explosive means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. Explosive includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. Explosive does not include fireworks , as defined in ORC 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in ORC 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of ORC 3743.80, and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to ORC 3737.82. 
(N)  (1)  Concealed handgun license or license to carry a concealed handgun means, subject to subsection (N)(2) of this section, a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under ORC 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC 109.69. 
(2)  A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued under ORC 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued under ORC 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued under ORC 2923.1213, a licence to carry a concealed handgun issued under ORC 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is specified in ORC 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC 109.69. 
(O)  Valid concealed handgun license or valid license to carry a concealed handgun means a concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under a suspension under division (A)(1) of ORC 2923.128, under ORC 2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other than this State in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked under division (B)(1) of ORC 2923.128, under ORC 2923.1213 or under a revocation provision of the state other than this State in which the license was issued. 
(P)  Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating to the regulation of business practices; 
(2)  Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two years or less. 
(Q)  Alien registration number means the number issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien's permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the USCIS number or the alien number . 
(R)  Active duty has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. 101. 
(ORC 2923.11) 
Sec. 549.02. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following: 
(1)  A deadly weapon other than a handgun; 
(2)  A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; 
(3)  A dangerous ordnance. 
(B)  No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun; 
(2)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(C)  (1)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  An officer, agent or employee or this or any other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance, or is authorized to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties; 
(b)  Any person who is employed in this State, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of ORC 109.801 unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in subsection (C)(1)(b) hereof does not apply to the person. 
(c)  A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of ORC 2923.11 in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor's person; 
(d)  A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of ORC 2923.11 in the actor's own home for any lawful purpose. 
(2)  Subsection (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, either is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125, unless the person knowingly is in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126. 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A)(1) of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies: 
(1)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(2)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(3)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home. 
(E)  No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsections (F)(2), (5) and (6) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsections (F)(2), (5) and (6) of this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (A) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (F)(2), (5) and (6) of this section, if the weapon involved is a firearm and the violation of this section is committed at premises for which a D permit has been issued under Chapter 4303, of the Revised Code or if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (A) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (F)(5) of this section, if a person being arrested for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126, the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that subsection. If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun license and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that subsection, and the offender shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of the following apply: 
i.  Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer. 
ii.  At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126. 
(b)  The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) if all of the following apply: 
i.  The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun license and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding the arrest. 
ii.  Within forty-five days after the arrest, the offender presents any type of concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in ORC 2945.71. 
iii.  At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126. 
(c)  If subsections (F)(2)(a) and (b) and (F)(5) of this section do not apply, the offender shall be punished under subsection (F)(1) or (6) of this section. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (B)(1) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (B)(1) hereof, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to ORC 2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of ORC 2923.128. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided herein, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (B)(2) or (B)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of ORC 2923.12(B)(2) or (B)(4) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, carrying concealed weapons is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (B)(2) or (B)(3) hereof, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to ORC 2923.128(A)(2). 
(5)  If a person being arrested for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126, the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125 and if the person is not in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126, the officer shall issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty shall not be assessed if both of the following apply: 
(a)  Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125, which were both valid at the time of the issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing officer. 
(b)  At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126. 
(6)  If a person being arrested for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is knowingly in a place described in division (B)(5) of ORC 2923.126, and is not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person's person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as follows: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the person produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor; 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of subsection (A)(2) of this section, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(G)  If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this subsection, division (B) of ORC 2923.163 applies. 
(ORC 2923.12) 
Sec. 549.03. - Using weapons while intoxicated. 
(A)  No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2923.15) 
Sec. 549.04. - Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways: 
(1)  In a closed package, box or case; 
(2)  In a compartment which can be reached only by leaving the vehicle; 
(3)  In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the purpose; 
(4)  If the firearm is at least twenty-four inches in overall length as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the barrel is at least eighteen inches in length, either in plain sight with the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight. 
(B)  No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, or who is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125, who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in ORC 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle. 
(3)  Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(C)  (1)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties; 
(b)  Any person who is employed in this State, who is authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of ORC 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in subsection (C)(1)(b) does not apply to the person. 
(2)  Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to a person who transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, both of the following apply: 
(a)  The person transporting or possessing the handgun is either carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of ORC 2923.125. 
(b)  The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of ORC 2923.126. 
(3)  Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of the following apply: 
(a)  The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle permit issued under ORC 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife. 
(b)  The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in ORC 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild quadruped or game bird. 
(c)  The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in ORC 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle sign. 
(D)  (1)  The affirmative defenses authorized in Section 549.02(D)(1) and (2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection (A) that involves a firearm other than a handgun. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A) of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided that the affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by subsection (A) while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic. 
(E)  (1)  No person who is charged with a violation of subsection (A) shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(2)  If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (B) of this section as it existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (B) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under ORC 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction. If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A) of this section as the subsection existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (A) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of subsection (B)(4) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under ORC 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of subsection (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to ORC 2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement purpose, or for a purpose defined in ORC 5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender's status as a licensee, a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of ORC 2923.128. A violation of subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this section, a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to ORC 2923.128(A)(2). 
(G)  If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this subsection, division (B) of ORC 2923.163 applies. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Motor vehicle , street and highway have the same meanings as in ORC 4511.01. 
(2)  (a)  Unloaded means: 
i.  With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in subsection (H)(2)(b) of this section, that no ammunition is in the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into the firearm in question and one of the following applies: 
a.  There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question. 
b.  Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure. 
ii.  For the purposes of subsection (H)(2)(a)i.b. of this section, a container that provides complete and separate enclosure includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  A package, box or case with multiple compartments, as long as the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not contain the magazine or speed loader; 
b.  A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the contents. 
iii.  For the purposes of subsection (H)(2)(a) of this section, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader. 
(b)  Unloaded means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan. 
(3)  Commercial motor vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC 4506.25(A). 
(4)  Motor carrier enforcement unit means the motor carrier enforcement unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is created by ORC 5503.34. 
(I)  Subsection (H)(2) of this section does not affect the authority of a person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as described in that subsection, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any other provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2923. A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter or ORC Ch. 2923. 
(ORC 2923.16) 
Sec. 549.05. - Failure to secure dangerous ordnance. 
(A)  No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous ordnance shall negligently fail to take proper precautions: 
(1)  To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person; 
(2)  To insure the safety of persons and property. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to secure dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 2923.19) 
Sec. 549.06. - Unlawful transactions in weapons. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade knife, gravity knife or similar weapon; 
(2)  When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license or permit showing him to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant to ORC 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of such record to the sheriff of the county or safety director or police chief of the municipality where the transaction takes place; 
(3)  Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's possession or under the person's control. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in weapons. Violation of subsections (A)(1) or (2) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Violation of subsection (A)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 2923.20) 
Sec. 549.07. - Underage purchase of firearm. 
(A)  No person under eighteen years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a firearm. 
(B)  No person under twenty-one years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a handgun, provided that this subsection does not apply to the purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person eighteen years of age or older and under twenty-one years of age if either of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is a law enforcement officer who is properly appointed or employed as a law enforcement officer and has received firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent firearms training. 
(2)  The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of the United States or the Ohio national guard, or was honorably discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States or the Ohio national guard, and the person has received firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of underage purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony of the fourth degree if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(ORC 2923.211) 
Sec. 549.08. - Discharging firearms. 
(A)  No person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
(B)  This section does not apply when firearms are used in self defense, in the discharge of official duty or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
Sec. 549.09. - Throwing or shooting missiles. 
(A)  No person shall throw, shoot or propel an arrow, missile, pellet, stone, metal or other similar substance capable of causing physical harm to persons or property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of another, or from any private property into or onto any public place or the property of another. This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges or instruction nor when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
Sec. 549.10. - Possessing replica firearm in school. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the object is capable of being fired. 
(2)  The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and indicates that it is a firearm. 
(B)  Subsection (A) hereof does not apply to premises upon which home schooling is conducted. Subsection (A) hereof also does not apply to a school administrator, teacher, or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the direction of a school administrator, teacher, or employee, or any other person who with the express prior approval of a school administrator possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose, including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, reenactment, or other dramatic presentation, or a ROTC activity or another similar use of the object. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of ORC 2923.122, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(D)  (1)  In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section and subject to subsection (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained nineteen years of age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school operated by a board of education or for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under ORC 3301.07, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver's license that then is in effect from the range specified in division (A)(4) of ORC 4510.02 and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type during the period of the suspension. 
If the offender is not a resident of this State, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in division (A)(4) of ORC 4510.02. 
(2)  If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend one of the types of licenses, permits, or privileges specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction permits specified in that subsection, the court in its discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation, or denial required in that subsection, but the court, in its discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(E)  As used in this section, object that is indistinguishable from a firearm means an object made, constructed, or altered so that, to a reasonable person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a firearm. 
(ORC 2923.122) 
Sec. 549.11. - Defacing identification marks of a firearm; possessing a defaced firearm. 
(A)  No person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark or identification on a firearm. 
(2)  Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed, or obliterated. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is guilty of possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2923.201) 
Sec. 549.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 553. - RAILROADS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicular homicide,  537.02; criminal mischief,  541.04. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; lighting railroads, ORC 723.33 et seq.; power to regulate train speed, ORC 723.48. 

Sec. 553.01. - Obstructing streets by railroad companies. 
(A)  (1)  No railroad company shall obstruct or permit or cause to be obstructed a public street, road or highway by permitting a railroad car, locomotive or other obstruction to remain upon or across it for longer than five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing along or upon such street, road or highway. 
(2)  At the end of each five minute period of obstruction of a public street, road or highway, each railroad company shall cause such railroad car, locomotive or other obstruction to be removed for sufficient time, not less than three minutes, to allow the passage of persons and vehicles waiting to cross. 
(3)  This section does not apply to obstruction of a public street, road or highway by a continuously moving through train or caused by circumstances wholly beyond the control of the railroad company, but does apply to other obstructions, including without limitation those caused by stopped trains and trains engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations. 
(4)  If a railroad car, locomotive, or other obstruction is obstructing a public street, road, or highway in violation of subsection (A)(1) hereof and the violation occurs in the unincorporated area of one or more counties, or in one or more municipal corporations, the officers and employees of each affected county or municipal corporation may charge the railroad company with only one violation of the law arising from the same facts and circumstances and the same act. 
(5)  Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this subsection (A)(1) hereof, summons shall be issued to the railroad company pursuant to ORC 2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular ticket or freight agent of the company in the county where the offense occurred. 
(ORC 5589.21) 
(B)  For purposes of this section, railroad company includes the officers, employees and agents of such company. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Sec. 553.011. - Obstructing streets by abandoning the locomotive. 
(A)  No railroad company shall obstruct, or permit or cause to be obstructed, a public street, road, or highway, by permitting any part of a train whose crew has abandoned the locomotive to remain across it for longer than five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing along or upon the street, road, or highway, unless the safety of the train crew requires them to abandon the locomotive. 
(B)  Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this section, summons shall be issued to the railroad company pursuant to ORC 2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular ticket or freight agent of the company in the county where the offense occurred. 
(ORC 5589.211) 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(ORC 5589.99) 
Sec. 553.02. - Climbing upon railroad cars. 
(A)  No person shall climb, jump, step or stand upon or cling or attach himself to a locomotive, engine or car upon the track of a railroad, unless in compliance with law or by permission under the rules of the corporation managing such railroad. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4999.02) 
Sec. 553.03. - Duties of locomotive engineer. 
(A)  No person in charge of a locomotive shall fail to bring the locomotive to a full stop at least 200 feet before arriving at a crossing with another track, or proceed through the crossing before signaled to do so or before the way is clear. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this misdemeanor causes physical harm to any person, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4999.04) 
Sec. 553.04. - Operating speed. 
(A)  No railroad company or any other person, firm or corporation including any agent or employee of any railroad company or of any other person, firm or corporation shall operate, run or move any locomotive, engine, car, cars or train upon or along any railroad track within the corporate limits of the City at a rate of speed greater than thirty miles per hour. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 988-76. Passed 11-23-1976.) 
Sec. 553.05. - Railroad vandalism. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle is on a railroad track. 
(B)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when it is on a railroad track. 
(C)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle is on a railroad track. 
(D)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of a railroad company. 
(E)  Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of railroad vandalism. Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car or other railroad vehicle. Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section is guilty of interference with the operation of a train. 
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(F)  Whoever violates subsection (D) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 2909.10) 
Sec. 553.06. - Grade crossing device vandalism. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove or otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign, yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of railroad grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2909.101) 
Sec. 553.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 557. - WEEDS, TREES AND SHRUBBERY[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Destruction of shrubs, trees or crops,  541.06. 
State Law reference- Municipal weed control procedure, ORC 731.51 et seq. 

Sec. 557.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 50-02 repealed  557.01, which pertained to trimming of trees and shrubbery required. See Chapter 1319 for current regulations. 
Sec. 557.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 50-02 repealed  557.02, which pertained to removal of grass and weeds by owner or occupant; notice. See Chapter 1319 for current regulations. 
Sec. 557.03. - Removal of trees or weeds by municipality. 
In the event the owner does not trim or remove any tree, plant or shrubbery, or any part thereof, or cut or destroy any noxious or poisonous weeds or vines, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then the Director of Administration shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and cause such tree, plant or shrubbery or part thereof to be trimmed or removed, and cut and remove all grass and weeds. 
Sec. 557.04. - Notice of cost; assessment. 
Whenever any tree, plant or shrubbery, or part thereof, or weeds and grass are growing in any streets, public places or upon private property contiguous to a street or sidewalk, or public place, and is trimmed or removed by the Municipality then, after the work is done, the Municipality shall give five days notice by regular mail to the owner of such lot or parcel of land, at his last known address, to pay the cost of such trimming or removal of trees, plants, shrubbery, grass or weeds, or parts thereof. Such notice shall be accompanied by a statement of the amount of cost incurred and, in the event the same is not paid within thirty days after the mailing of such notice, such amount shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection of the same as other taxes and assessments are collected. 
Sec. 557.99. - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 559. - USE OF ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all purpose vehicles, Ch. 375. 

Sec. 559.01. - Definition of all-purpose vehicle. 
Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes, but excluding any self-propelled vehicle not principally used for purpose of personal transportation, any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under ORC Ch. 4503 or Chapter 4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by definition (B) of ORC 501.01. 
(Ord. 35-13. Passed 8-8-2013.) 
Sec. 559.02. - Operation. 
No all-purpose vehicle shall be operated on any real property within the City unless all of the following conditions and limitations have been complied with by the operator. 
(A)  When the operator does not reside or own the property on which said vehicle is being operated, the operator shall possess written permission from the owner of the property. 
(B)  The all-purpose vehicle shall not be operated within 100 feet of any public sidewalk or within 120 feet of any public street where a sidewalk does not exist; nor shall it be operated within 25 feet of any adjoining property line. 
(C)  The all-purpose vehicle shall not be operated within 250 feet of any residential dwelling not on the property upon which the all-purpose vehicle is being operated. 
(D)  The all-purpose vehicle shall only be operated on real property within the Municipal limits of the City of Marysville between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(E)  The operator shall not unreasonably make, cause to be made or continue to be made any noise, or dust, which disturbs the reasonable peace of the area within which the operator is operating any all-purpose vehicle. 
(Ord. 35-13. Passed 8-8-2013.) 
Sec. 559.03. - Restrictions. 
(A)  No owner of property shall allow more than three all-purpose vehicles operating on any property at a time. 
(B)  No owner of the property wherein the all-purpose vehicle is being operated shall recklessly permit an individual to violate Sections 559.02(A) through (E). 
(Ord. 35-13. Passed 8-8-2013.) 
Sec. 559.04. - Exceptions. 
(A)  This Chapter does not apply to City Parks, which are defined and regulated in Chapter 951 of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances. 
(B)  This Chapter does not apply to persons operating an all-purpose vehicle under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Medical or health emergencies. 
(2)  Grass cutting, field plowing, property maintenance or any agricultural related activity. 
(3)  Snow plowing. 
(4)  Commercial establishments who build, sell or repair all-purpose vehicles. 
(5)  Moving the all-purpose vehicle onto a trailer for purpose of transportation or removing said vehicle from a trailer for parking or storage purposes. 
(6)  Repairing such all-purpose vehicle in an enclosed structure. 
(7)  By law enforcement personnel in the course of their duties. 
(8)  At the Union County Fairgrounds with the express permission from the Union County Fair Board or its agent. 
(9)  By personnel and employees of Marysville Exempted Village School District while in the course of their duties. 
(10)  By personnel and employees of Union County with the express permission of the Board of County Commissioners or its agent. 
(11)  By personnel and employees of the City of Marysville with the express permission of the Director of Administration or his/her agent. 
(Ord. 35-13. Passed 8-8-2013.) 
Sec. 559.99 - Penalty. 
Whoever violates Sections 559.02 or 559.03 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense; on the second offense within one year after conviction of the first offense the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the conviction of the second offense the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. 35-13. Passed 8-8-2013.) 
PART SEVEN - BUSINESS REGULATION CODE 
  
CHAPTER 709. - OIL AND GAS WELLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-17 ,  I, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, amended Ch. 709 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 709,  709.01-709.15, 709.99, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 709, passed May 14, 1964. 

Sec. 709.01. - Oil and gas wells prohibited. 
The drilling and operation of oil and/or gas wells is prohibited within the limits of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 69-17 . Passed 12-11-2017.) 
Sec. 709.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates the provisions of section 709.01 shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 69-17 . Passed 12-11-2017.) 
CHAPTER 713. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 46-18 ,  I, adopted July 9, 2018, amended Ch. 713 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 713,  713.01-713.09, 713.99, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 21-09, passed May 28, 2009. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, ORC 715.61 et seq.; home solicitation sales, ORC 1345.21 et seq.; charitable solicitations, ORC Ch. 1716. 
Note- Federal legal holidays, see 5 U.S. Code 6103. 

Sec. 713.01. - Legislative findings. 
The City of Marysville Council finds that persons and organizations have been visiting and continue to visit private residential properties for purposes of soliciting or for the peddling of goods, wares, merchandise or services. Some residents find these activities to be intrusive upon their privacy. The City Council further finds that a variety of misrepresentations and other frauds are or could be employed in such activities. As such, the City Council wishes to enact this chapter for the purposes of protecting the privacy of residents and minimizing fraudulent practices by persons representing themselves as peddlers, solicitors or canvassers. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.02. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for purposes of this chapter: 
(A)  Canvasser means any person who engages in canvassing. 
(B)  Canvassing means the act of any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, who goes from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street without requesting funds or donations: 
(1)  Conducting a poll, survey, petition drive; 
(2)  Sharing, communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs; or 
(3)  Disseminating oral or written information, including, but not limited to, handbills, to a person willing to directly receive such information, whether political, religious, noncommercial, charitable, or otherwise. 
(C)  Charitable means a person or organization which raises funds in order to support a common interest. 
(D)  City means the jurisdictional limits of the City of Marysville, unless a different geographical area or entity is clearly indicated by the context. 
(E)  Handbills means any commercial or noncommercial handbill, pamphlet, circular, newspaper, paper, newsletter, booklet, poster, leaflet, brochure or other printed or written materials that have been cast, deposited, placed, scattered or thrown onto the property of a business or residence in the absence of a subscription agreement. 
(F)  Hawker means any person/vendor that travels by mobile means selling goods/merchandise or conveying ideas, views or beliefs by verbal communication (shouting). 
(G)  Peddler means any person who engages in peddling. 
(H)  Peddling means the act of any person going onto the premises of a private residence and in possession, sells or offers for sale and delivery, goods or merchandise or services of any kind or description except the sale of goods and services for charitable or non-profit causes. Peddling shall not include the act of carrying, conveying or transporting newspapers or other retail goods to customers who have ordered such goods or to regular subscription-based customers on established routes. Peddling shall not include the sale of goods or services for charitable or non-profit causes. 
(I)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, church, sect, denomination, league, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, education entity, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group acting as a unit. 
(J)  Solicitation means the act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle, or any other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, requesting money or any other personal or real property controlled by the owner or occupant of the residence for future delivery of goods or merchandise or services of any kind or description. Solicitation shall not include the sale of goods or services for charitable or non-profit causes. 
(K)  Solicitor means any person who engages in solicitation. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.03. - Notice prohibiting peddling, solicitation and canvassing. 
(A)  No person shall enter upon any residence and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in peddling or solicitation in defiance of a notice described in subsection (B) of this section. 
(B)  Notice by the owners or occupants of any residence of their unwillingness to receive any uninvited peddler or solicitor shall be given by displaying a weatherproof card, decal, or sign easily seen from the public right-of-way or the normal entryway to a house or dwelling. The notice must be placed upon or near the main entrance door to the residence and must state: "No Solicitors", or words to that effect, with the letters at least two inch high. No peddler or solicitor shall discard any material on vacant residential, commercial, or public real property upon evidence of vacancy of said property. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.04. - Permit required solicitation and peddling. 
(A)  No person shall engage in solicitation or peddling unless such person obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, or his or her designee. Any permit obtained is nontransferable unless used on behalf of an employer, corporation, group or organization as described in subsection (B)(5) of this section. 
(B)  The application for the permit, as provided by the city, or its designee, shall contain information about the solicitor or peddler, including: 
(1)  Name and physical description of the applicant. 
(2)  Date of birth, driver's license number (including picture) or other identification number, and Social Security number. 
(3)  Permanent home address. 
(4)  Local address and telephone number. 
(5)  If employed, the name, address, telephone number and federal identification number of the employer, or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal. 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense, whether felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations. As to any such offense, the applicant must provide the date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed. 
(7)  Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws and regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed solicitation or peddling, or which, under any such laws or regulations, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  A statement of the nature and character of applicant's proposed practice or activity. 
(9)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity and background of the applicant or the employer as the city of Marysville division of police may require, including, but not limited to, background checks, fingerprints and photograph or photographs of the persons. Permits shall be submitted once the allowable time is completed from the background check. 
(C)  Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall pay a set nonrefundable fee established by the City of Marysville police division. Any person eighteen years of age and above shall pay the set nonrefundable fee. All annual permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire twelve months after issued. Other permits shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.05. - Activities exempt from permit. 
(A)  Persons engaging in the following activities do not need a permit and are exempt from the requirements in Section 713.04. 
(1)  Those seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any residence or business in regard to any political or religious matter. 
(2)  Those seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or business, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any political or religious matter. 
(3)  Those who canvass door-to-door. 
(4)  Those seeking to obtain donations made incidental to canvassing door-to-door on behalf of any charitable, religious or political purpose. 
(5)  Those distributing handbills, provided such person does not ring the doorbell, rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant. 
(6)  Those in the act of carrying, conveying or transporting consumer goods, newspapers or other retail goods to customers who have ordered such goods or to regular subscription-based customers on established routes. 
(B)  Those persons who are exempt under this section are still required to comply with the requirements set in Sections 713.03, 713.09, 713.10 and 713.11. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.06. - Permit issuance solicitation and peddling. 
(A)  Upon receipt of an application and conclusion of his or her investigation of the information contained in the application, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit unless: 
(1)  The applicant made one or more material misstatements in the permit application. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted, or held liable for, a crime of moral turpitude, or any felony or misdemeanor offense that reasonably and directly indicates a risk to the public. 
(3)  The applicant has had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against him or her by any court of competent jurisdiction within 10 years prior to the date of the application. 
(4)  The applicant fails to provide proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local law or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business. 
(5)  The applicant has previously been convicted for violation of any provision of this chapter, or has had any license issued pursuant to this chapter revoked. 
(B)  If granted, all annual permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire twelve months after issued. Other permits shall expire on the date specified in the license. If denied, any person or business who has applied for a permit in accordance with this chapter and to whom the Chief of Police or his or her designee has, after an investigation, denied a permit may, within thirty days, submit to the City Manager a written appeal which succinctly states the grounds for such appeal. The City Manager or his or her designee shall conduct a hearing within fifteen days of receipt of the appeal. The City Manager or his or her designee shall submit a final written decision within five business days of the hearing. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.07. - Violation of permit conditions. 
(A)  A permit issued under this chapter may be subject to a revocation hearing if the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, finds any of the following: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of the peddler or solicitor. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of solicitation or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(B)  If the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, finds that a permit holder's activity is a public health risk, or subjects any individual, or the community, to imminent danger, he or she may suspend the permit, effective immediately. 
(C)  In the event that the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, suspends the permit according to subsection (B) of this section or determines that grounds exist to warrant the revocation of a permit issued under this chapter, within ten (10) days of the revocation of the permit. The former permit holder may submit a written request for an appeal to the City Manager, who shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) business days of receiving said request. The City Manager shall give a written statement on said appeal within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.08. - Photo identifications. 
(A)  Every person, when acting as a solicitor or peddler, shall carry a photo identification showing the person's name and permanent or business address, unless the solicitor or peddler is a minor, in which case the minor's home address need not be disclosed. In addition, the solicitor or peddler must carry a copy of a valid permit, if applicable, obtained pursuant to Section 713.04. 
(B)  If acting on behalf of an employer, corporation, group or organization, the solicitor or peddler shall carry written authorization by such third party and a copy of the permit issued to such third party. 
(C)  Permits, identification and authorizations shall be presented upon request by any person or occupant approached by the solicitor or peddler for the purposes of solicitation or peddling, and to any law enforcement or city official. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.09. - Prohibited acts. 
The performance by a solicitor, canvasser or peddler of any of the following acts shall constitute a violation of this chapter: 
(A)  No person shall represent in any manner that the City, or its departments or officers, has endorsed the permit holder or the products, services or causes on behalf of which individuals are being solicited, peddled or canvassed without the written consent of the City Manager. 
(B)  No person shall solicit, peddle or canvass any person that has objected, by words or conduct, to such soliciting, canvassing or peddling. 
(C)  No person shall represent in any manner that the solicitation or peddling is conducted for anyone other than the permit holder. 
(D)  No person shall refuse to identify the permit holder on whose behalf the solicitation or peddling is being conducted when requested to do so by any person contacted by the solicitor or peddler, or fail to truthfully state the uses to which any solicited items will be put when requested to do so by any person contacted by the solicitor or peddler. 
(E)  No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any individual who declines to be subject to any solicitation, peddling or canvassing or who declines to make a purchase, donation or contribution. 
(F)  No person shall accept food stamps as a contribution. 
(G)  No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit, peddle or canvass for any purpose by misrepresentation of his or her name, occupation, financial condition, social condition, physical or mental health, or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any soliciting, peddling or canvassing for any purpose in the city. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.10. - Hours of business. 
No person shall distribute or deposit any handbill on any residence or place of premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock on the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to canvass, solicit or peddle before 9.00 a.m. or after 8.00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and before 12.00 p.m. or after 8.00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
Sec. 713.11. - Penalty and enforcement. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a second or subsequent violation of this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 46-18 . Passed 7-9-2018.) 
CHAPTER 714. - MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE/VENDORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 37-18 ,  I(App.A), adopted May 14, 2018, amended Ch. 714 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 714,  714.1-714.5, 714.98, 714.99, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 19-17 ,  I(App. A), 3-27-2017. 

Sec. 714.01. - Definitions. 
(A)  Mobile Food Vehicle. A commercially manufactured, motorized or non-motorized mobile food unit in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for service, sale or distribution. 
(B)  Mobile Food Vehicle Vendor. The owner of mobile food vehicle or the owner's agent; hereinafter referred to as "vendor." 
(C)  Types of Vehicles. 
 Concession Trailers/Trucks. Full infrastructure, self-contained units from which the vendor provides full food service. 
 Pushcarts. Limited infrastructure, those in which the vendor stands on the ground or those in which the vendor stands inside the cart and provides food service. 
 Catering Type Trucks. Distribute prepackaged and non-prepackaged hot and cold type foods. 
 Agricultural Trailers/Trucks. Distribute farmed fruit and vegetable foods. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.02. - Permit required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person/vendor to operate within the City of Marysville a mobile food vehicle, as defined in this chapter, without first having obtained a permit for that purpose. 
(B)  Any person/vendor desiring to operate a mobile food vehicle shall obtain a permit from the Division of Engineering. The application for such permit shall be on the permit form provided by the Division of Engineering and shall include the following: 
(1)  Mobile business name, home/corporate address and signature of mobile food vehicle vendor/agent and each operating personnel. 
(2)  Map location placement of mobile food vehicle on operating property. 
(3)  A valid copy of all necessary food service operation licenses or permits required by State of Ohio Health or Union County Health Department. 
(4)  A signed statement that the person/vendor shall hold harmless the City of Marysville and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the City of Marysville, its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. Vendor shall furnish and maintain such public liability, food products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect vendor, property owners, and the City of Marysville from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from the operations under the license or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The policy shall further provide that it may not be cancelled except upon thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the City of Marysville Law Director. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be invalid at any time the insurance required herein is not maintained and evidence of continuing coverage is not filed with the City of Marysville Law Department. 
(5)  No application will be accepted for a permit to operate at a location where a current permit has been issued or a complete application is pending. If the proposed location is private property, the applicant shall provide to the City of Marysville documented consent from the property owner. 
(6)  If a permit for the requested operating location(s) is denied, the applicant may select an alternate location(s), which shall also be referred to the Division of Engineering for review. 
(7)  The person/vendor shall immediately notify the Division of Engineering of any changes to the information provided in the application. Failure to apprise the Division of Engineering of changes may result in the nullification of the permit. 
(8)  A permit is not required if the person/vendor is participating in a City of Marysville temporary sanctioned City event. The person/vendor will have to register with the City of Marysville Recreation/Events Office for City sanctioned events. The person/vendor will still be responsible to adhere to all State and County food service operation guidelines. 
(9)  The City of Marysville may refuse to issue, revoke, or suspend a permit if any applicant or agent thereof refuses to comply with any requirement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.03. - Fees and conditions of permit. 
(A)  All vendors licensed under this chapter shall pay an annual license fee of $25.00 to the City of Marysville. This fee shall not be prorated for a partial year. 
(B)  The annual license permit is certified for the calendar year. However, the permit shall expire on December 31st, regardless of when it was obtained during the year. 
(C)  The permit shall not be transferable from person/vendor to person/vendor or from place to place without the approval of the Division of Engineering. 
(D)  The approved operational location may be changed, either temporarily or permanently, by the Division of Engineering, who shall promptly provide notice of such change to the person/vendor. 
(E)  The permit is valid for one (1) mobile food vehicle only. Multiple food vehicles require a permit for each mobile food vehicle. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.04. - Location and time review and restrictions. 
(A)  Proposed operating time and locations shall be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 8.00 a.m. and 9.00 p.m. No approved mobile food vehicle shall be left unattended or stored outside of these allowed hours of operation. No mobile food vehicle shall remain for seasonal storage. Extended hours may be granted on a case-by-case basis by the Zoning Administrator, and any vendor operating outside the above hours of operation must have written authorization by the Division of Engineering. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the permit shall be referred to the Division of Engineering for approval or disapproval. The use of the permit operating location for mobile food vending must be compatible with the public interest in use of the public right-of-way. In making such determination, the Division of Engineering or Public Service Director shall consider the width of the public way, parking issues and traffic congestion, the proximity and location of existing street furniture, including, but not limited to, utility poles, handicap zones, parking meters, bus shelters, benches, street trees, as well as the presence of bus stops, truck loading zones, or other businesses or approved mobile food vehicles to determine whether the requested location would result in pedestrian or street congestion. 
(3)  Person/Vendor shall obey any lawful order by the City of Marysville to stop all operations at the permitted location where a mobile food vehicle would substantially obstruct a public way, impair the movement of pedestrians or vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety. 
(4)  Person/Vendor shall not operate a mobile food vehicle within five hundred (500) feet of any fair, carnival, circus, festival, special event, or civic event that is licensed or sanctioned by the City of Marysville except when person/vendor has registered with The City of Marysville Recreational/Events Office. 
(5)  On days when school is in session at elementary, middle, secondary/intermediate schools, high schools, which includes, sporting events (public or private), it shall be unlawful for any vendor to operate a mobile food vehicle within five hundred (500) feet of the property of said school(s), unless the person/vendor has obtained written permission from the Board of Education of the Marysville Exempted School District. The City of Marysville permit is still required. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor to operate a mobile food vehicle in or within one hundred (100) feet of a City of Marysville park without first obtaining written authorization from the City of Marysville Public Service Director. 
(7)  No mobile food vehicle vendor shall use or maintain any outside sound amplifying equipment, movement lighting (strobes/digital), or noisemakers, such as bells, horns or whistles. 
(8)  No mobile food vehicle shall use external signage (except menu boards), bollards, seating, or any other equipment not contained within the vehicle. The mobile food service vendor shall adhere to City of Marysville Codified Ordinance Chapter 1143 for signage. 
(9)  All identifying information, logos, advertising, decorations, or other displays on the exterior of a mobile food vehicle shall adhere to the Marysville signage regulations. In particular, exterior displays shall be designed to minimize confusion or distraction that jeopardizes vehicular and pedestrian safety and shall be harmonious with the surroundings and consistent with the character of the community in which the mobile food vehicle operates. 
(10)  The mobile food vehicle shall not have a drive-through. 
(11)  Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located on a public way shall be Self-contained and shall not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. Mobile food vehicles on private property may use electrical power from an adjacent property only when the property owner provides documented consent. All other power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or equipment shall be extended at grade across any City street, alley or sidewalk unless otherwise approved by the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.05. - Sanitation and inspection. 
(A)  All mobile food vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be the duty of the Division of Engineering to make or cause to be made such exterior area inspections as may be necessary to ensure all mobile food vehicles are kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The Division of Engineering, bearing proper identification, shall be permitted to inspect the exterior area mobile food vehicle at any reasonable time for the purpose of determining whether the vendor has complied with the terms of this chapter. 
(B)  All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids and properly disposed of by the person/vendor. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained on to/or into sidewalks, streets, gutters or drains. A garbage receptacle shall be easily accessible for customer use. Vendor shall be responsible for all litter and garbage left by customers. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.98. - Permit adverse action. 
An application or approved permit may be denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed for any of the following reasons: 
(A)  The permit contains material omissions or false, fraudulent, or deceptive statements or facts. 
(B)  The mobile food vehicle is operated in such a manner as constituting a public Nuisance, safety or public health hazard, or violates the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville or any Federal or State statute(s). 
(C)  The provisions of this section are not exclusive. This Section shall not preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this Code or any State or Federal regulations. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 714.99. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction thereof, be fined up to one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for each violation. 
(Ord. 37-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
CHAPTER 717. - CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 22-17 ,  I(App. A), adopted April 10, 2017, amended Ch. 717 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 717,  717.01-717.06, 717.99, pertained to sewer tapper licensing, and derived from Ord. 711. Passed 5-28-1964; Ord. 24-83. Passed 4-14-1983; Ord. 26-83. Passed 4-14-1983. 
Cross reference- Sewers, Ch. 921; Comprehensive Right-of-Way, Ch. 901. 
State Law reference- Power to license sewer tappers, ORC 715.27(C). 

Sec. 717.01. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any contractor to operate within the public right-of-way or on any public utility infrastructure of the City of Marysville, without first having obtained a Contractor's License for that purpose. Any contractor engaging in the connection, extension and construction of any sewer/water infrastructure, sidewalk, curb, driveway approach or any excavation for any reason whatsoever, in any street, avenue, alley, lane, easement, right-of-way or public/private location, except in cases of emergency, shall obtain a Contractor's License. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 717.02. - Application and fee required. 
Any contractor desiring to obtain a license pursuant to section 717.01, may obtain and submit an application to the City of Marysville Engineering Division. The application fee of $50.00 will be paid to the City of Marysville. This fee shall not be prorated for a partial year. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 717.03. - Bond and insurance requirements. 
(A)  Prior to the issuance of a license, the contractor making the application for such license shall provide to the City of Marysville a surety (i.e., bond) in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by the contractor or a surety agent. This surety agreement shall guarantee the contractor properly executes and completes the work authorized by the City of Marysville, which includes the complete restoration of the area where the work is performed to its original condition or current industry standards and to the full satisfaction of the City of Marysville. 
(B)  The contractor shall provide to the City of Marysville a certificate of liability insurance, which expressly indemnifies the City of Marysville against any claims, demands, lawsuits or judgments arising out of the exercise of the privilege granted, in the amount of at least $100,000.00 per person or $300,000.00 aggregate for personal injuries and $100,000.00 for property damage. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017; Ord. 70-17 . Passed 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 717.04. - Expiration. 
The annual license application is certified for the calendar year. However, the permit shall expire on December 31st, regardless of when it was obtained during the year. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 717.05. - License adverse action. 
A license or application may be denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed for any of the following reasons: 
(A)  The application contains material omissions or false, fraudulent, or deceptive statements or facts. 
(B)  The contractor is operating in such a manner as constituting a public nuisance, safety or public health hazard, or violates the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville or any Federal or State statute(s). 
(C)  The provisions of this section are not exclusive. This section shall not preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this Code or any State or Federal regulations. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 717.06. - License exemption. 
An individual property owner has the option of performing work within the right-of-way or on any public utility infrastructure and consequently takes sole responsibility for the completion of the project. The individual property owner is exempt from securing a contractor's license (as set forth in Chapter 717.01), provided that the individual property owner personally performs the work and submits a City of Marysville Property Owner Statement along with a Right-of-Way Application and the designated Right-of-Way Application service fees. This Statement and Application may be obtained and submitted at the City of Marysville Engineering Division. It will be the individual property owner's responsibility for the construction and the coordination of all necessary inspections for the proposed improvements within the right-of-way. If such improvements are found to have not met the current City of Marysville standards, the individual property owner will be responsible for the cost of any repairs or replacements necessary to bring the improvements into compliance with the City of Marysville standards. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 717.99. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction thereof, be fined up to one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for each violation. In addition, the City is not precluded from pursuing any available civil remedies. 
(Ord. 22-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
CHAPTER 721. - VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Unauthorized connections, ORC 4933.42. 

Sec. 721.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
(A)  Incumbent Cable Provider means any person who on the effective date of this section is the holder of a cable franchise agreement with the City as granted pursuant to requirements of 47 U.S.C. 541. 
(B)  PEG means activities or actions performed for the benefit of public, educational and government video programming by the City. 
(C)  Video Service means the service defined in ORC 1332.21(J). 
(D)  Video Service Authorization or VSA means the authorization granted to a video service provider in accordance with the requirements of ORC 1332.21 to 1332.34 et seq. 
(E)  Video Service Provider Fee or VSP Fee means the fee paid by a VSP in accordance with the requirements of ORC 1332.32. 
(F)  Video Service Provider or VSP means a person, firm or corporation granted a video service authorization under ORC 1332.21 to 1332.34 et seq. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.02. - VSP fee. 
In accordance with the requirements of ORC 1332.32, all VSPs providing video service in the City pursuant to a VSA obtained from the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay a VSP Fee in the amount of five percent (5%) of gross revenues from providing Video Service in the City (unless an Incumbent Cable Provider in the City pays less than five percent (5%), in which case the new entrant VSP shall be required to pay such equal percentage of gross revenues as the Incumbent Cable Provider who pays the lowest percentage in the City until a higher percentage is paid), which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP Fee shall be paid quarterly, not later than sixty days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.03. - VSP fee notice provision. 
Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing Video Service in the City pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, the Mayor or his/her designee is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with notice of the VSP Fee as determined by this Council in Section 721.02 which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.04. - VSP access provision. 
Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing Video Service in the City pursuant to a VSA, the Mayor or his/her designee is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with notice that the VSP shall be required to provide the same number of PEG channels in the City under the same service tier conditions and subject to the same channel reclamation conditions as may be proscribed by ORC 1332.30(A)(1)(a-b) for the Incumbent Cable Provider with the most recent obligation in the City, which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery, and shall state the appropriate number of PEG channels and service tiers required to be provided by the VSP within the City within 120 days after delivery of such notice. Additionally, should no PEG channels currently be provided by an Incumbent Cable Provider with such an obligation in the City, the Mayor may provide written notice to a VSP of its obligation to provide PEG channels in accordance with ORC 1332.30(B)(1). 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.05. - Access programming requirement. 
In accordance with the requirements of ORC 1332.30(A)(1)(a) or ORC 1332.30(B)(1) when PEG channels are provided to the City by an Incumbent Cable Provider or VSP, and such PEG channels are required to be programmed by the City with at least forty hours of non-character generated content per week with at least sixty percent (60%) of the programming being non-repeat and locally produced. For the purposes of this section, non-repeat and locally produced shall mean, the first three playbacks of programming produced or provided by any local resident, the City, or any local public or private agency that provides services to residents of Union County or the greater Columbus metro area, or any transmission of a meeting or proceeding of any local, state or federal governmental entity. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.06. - Fee payment requirements. 
Any VSP Fee required to be paid to the City by a VSP shall be made quarterly and be remitted directly to the City via a negotiable instrument made payable to: The City of Marysville, 125 East Sixth Street, Marysville, Ohio 43040, not later than sixty days after the end of a calendar quarter. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.07. - PEG origination point. 
The PEG programming origination point of the City for the delivery of VSP access services shall be located at the 125 East Sixth Street, Marysville, Ohio 43040 building/location. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.08. - Notice requirement. 
Any notice to the City that is required of a VSP in accordance with ORC 1332.21 through 1332.34 shall be provided in written form to the Mayor either by certified mail, express mail or upon personal delivery, all evidenced by a return receipt. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.09. - Application to incumbent cable providers. 
Nothing in this section shall apply to incumbent cable providers until they are granted a Video Service Authorization in accordance with ORC 1332.21-1332.34 et seq. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 721.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 2-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
CHAPTER 722. - SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL CAFES AND/OR SKILL GAME ROOMS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Gambling, Ch. 517. 

Sec. 722.01. - Title, purpose and objectives. 
(A)  Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Sweepstakes Terminal Cafs and Skill Game Rooms. 
(B)  Purpose and Objectives. It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the City to establish standards for licensing, regulation and control of devices and sweepstakes terminal cafs and/or skill game rooms and premises upon which they are located and operated for purpose of entertainment of the public. The objectives of this chapter are to prevent safety and fire hazards, disturbances, disruption of pedestrian traffic, disorderly assemblies, theft of personal property, gambling and truancy within the City. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.02. - Construction, separability and applicability of chapter. 
(A)  Construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its purpose and objectives. 
(B)  Separability. If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and neither the remainder of this chapter nor the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.03. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Device means any computer, machine, game or apparatus which, upon the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or upon payment of anything of value, wherein a product or service is provided, and may be operated by the public generally for use as a contest of skill, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, and which in no way tends to encourage gambling. 
(B)  Director of Administration means the City Director of Administration. 
(C)  Board means the City Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(D)  Operator means the person or persons having authority to control the premises of an arcade amusement center or an accessory amusement area. 
(E)  Licensee means the person or persons who sign an application for a license hereunder and to whom such license is issued. 
(F)  Owner means any person who possesses a pecuniary interest, either directly or indirectly, of twenty-five percent or more in an amusement device business. 
(G)  Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation of any other form of business organization. 
(H)  Premises means the building or portion thereof used for conducting the operation of an amusement device business. 
(I)  School means any educational institution, public, private, secular or parochial, which offers instruction of high school grade or lower. 
(J)  Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room means any individual premises upon which any device is located for the use or entertainment of the public, whether or not such premises have other business purposes of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.04. - Number of Sweepstakes Terminal Cafs and/or Skill Game Rooms permitted. 
The number of sweepstakes terminal cafs and/or skill game rooms permitted shall be based on: 
(A)  The most recent Proclamation of Population as authorized by the Secretary of State for the State of Ohio. 
(B)  No more than one sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room for every 7,000 residents shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.05. - Permitted locations. 
Sweepstakes Terminal Cafs and/or Skill Game Rooms shall be permitted in the SD-1 and TOC Zoning Districts, but shall not be located within 500 feet of any school or church-owned or operated property. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.06. - Device license required. 
No person shall display for purpose of use any device in the City without having first obtained a license therefore as provided in this chapter, which license shall be designated as a device license. A separate license is required for each such device. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.07. - Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room license required. 
No person shall conduct or operate a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room area in the City without having first obtained a license therefore as provided in this chapter, which license shall be designated as a sweepstakes terminal caf license. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.08. - Authority of Director of Administration. 
Authority is hereby established and vested in the Director of Administration to consider applications for licenses under this chapter, conduct investigations thereon and issue or deny issuance of such licenses based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.09. - Nature of licenses. 
(A)  All Licenses. All licenses issued under this chapter shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  Each such license shall be an annual license which covers a period from January 1 through December 31 of the same year unless earlier suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Each such license shall vest a personal privilege but not any property rights in the licensee. 
(3)  Each such license shall be required to be displayed permanently in a conspicuous place upon the premises for which it is issued. 
(4)  Each such license shall be in the name of the applicant. 
(5)  Each such license shall be neither assignable nor transferable, either as to person or location. 
(6)  Each such license, if lost, destroyed or mutilated, upon application within thirty days therefore may be replaced by a replacement license issued by the Director of Administration bearing the word "Replacement" across its face and bearing the same license number as the license which it replaces. 
(B)  Device Licenses. All device licenses issued under this chapter shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  Each such license shall be issued for an individual device only. 
(2)  Each such license shall specify the name and address of each licensee, and the manufacturer, model number and serial number of the device for which it was issued. 
(3)  Each such license, if changed, mutilated, erased or in any manner defaced, shall be void, and any amusement device which the same shall purport to license shall be deemed an unlicensed amusement device. 
(C)  Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room Licenses. All licenses issued under this chapter shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  Each such license shall be issued only for an individual business at an individual premise. 
(2)  Each such license shall specify the name and address of each licensee, and the manufacturer, model number and serial number of each device located upon the premises for which it was issued. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.10. - Procedure for obtaining licenses. 
(A)  Applications for Licenses. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be in writing on a form approved by and filed with the Director of Administration. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners and shall contain information required by this section supplied in detail as to each such person, including general and limited partners, or partnerships, shareholders of corporations and principals of any other type of business entity. In the event that no person owns twenty-five percent or more of the sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room, such application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room. All applications shall contain a statement that the information contained therein is complete, accurate and truthful to the best knowledge of all applicants. 
(B)  Contents of Applications. The application shall contain the following information as to all owners: 
(1)  True name and all names used in the past five years; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Permanent home address and all home addresses used in the past five years; 
(4)  Business and home telephone numbers; 
(5)  Employment history for the past five years; 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the owner has been convicted of any crime other than traffic offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense and the penalty imposed; 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the owner has ever conducted a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room and, if so, when, where and for how long; 
(8)  A description of the nature and operation of the main type of business activity to be conducted upon the premises; 
(9)  A description of the nature and operation of any business to be conducted in conjunction with the sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room and the anticipated percentage of gross revenue to be derived from each respective business; 
(10)  The address and telephone number of the premises and of the business, if different from that of the premises; 
(11)  The name under which the business and premises will be operated; 
(12)  A statement as to whether or not the owner will directly operate the sweepstakes terminal caf or skill game room, or whether or not an operator who is not an owner will operate it, and if the latter, the application shall contain information required by this section supplied in detail as to each such operator; 
(13)  A floor plan of the premises and the immediate vicinity drawn to scale, showing the square footage and placement of the devices, exits, windows, storage spaces, bicycle storage racks and off-street parking; 
(14)  A map showing all schools and church-owned or operated properties located within a radius of 500 feet of the premises; 
(15)  The name, address and telephone number of the agent of the business upon whom service of process can effectively and validly be made; 
(16)  The number, type, name, model and manufacturer's serial number of each device requested to be licensed; 
(17)  The name and address of the owner, distributor and manufacturer of each device requested to be licensed; 
(18)  Specification of terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of each amusement device requested to be licensed; 
(19)  A description as to the nature and type of property or services which will be sold or supplied upon the premises; 
(20)  A copy of the title or lease to the premises; 
(21)  A copy of the Articles of Incorporation, if the owner is a corporation; 
(22)  A copy of the Operating Agreement, if the owner is a limited liability corporation; 
(23)  A copy of the Partnership Agreement, if the owner is a partnership; 
(24)  Specification of the days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed activity will be conducted; and 
(25)  Any other information which the Director of Administration may deem reasonably necessary for the full interest of the public in the application. 
(C)  Reports of City Officials. Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the Director of Administration shall request the following reports, which shall be rendered to him within thirty days of the date of filing of the application. 
(1)  A written report from the Fire Chief shall be submitted to the Director of Administration as to whether the premises and devices thereon will create a fire hazard; and 
(2)  A written report from the Police Chief shall be submitted to the Director of Administration specifying, with regard to all owners and operators, any convictions for any felony or for any misdemeanor involving the operation of an amusement device business or involving physical violence, gambling activity, controlled substances, alcoholic beverages, minors or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  A written report from the Union County Chief Building Official shall be submitted to the Director of Administration as to whether all building and zoning laws have been satisfied. 
(D)  Determination Process. 
(1)  Director of Administration. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be considered by the Director of Administration, who shall, within ten days after receiving the written reports, either issue such licenses or deny issuance of such licenses. 
(2)  Appeal to Board. In the event of the denial of issuance of such a license, the applicant shall be notified of such denial and the specific reasons therefore in writing. Such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant at the address specified in the application. The applicant shall have ten days after receipt of such notice within which to appeal such denial, by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board of Zoning Appeals. Thereupon, the applicant shall have not less than ten days' notice of the date and place of the hearing. The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals, which Board shall have the power after such hearing to confirm the denial, order the license to be issued, or, at its discretion, to issue a conditional or probationary license. In rendering its decision, the Board may, for good cause shown, modify or waive any of the provisions of this chapter in the interest of justice. 
(3)  Appeal to Court of Common Pleas shall be made within ten days of the Board's written decision. 
(E)  License Renewal. Each device license and sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room license must be renewed annually. At the time of renewal, a statement shall be filed with the Director of Administration that the information listed on the original application for the license is still complete, accurate and truthful to the best knowledge of all applicants, or a statement shall be filed with the Director of Administration listing each and every item of information which has changed since the original application. Such statement shall be signed by the same persons who signed the original application. The Director of Administration may determine to accept such statement and issue the license requested, or he may determine to enforce the procedure required for an original license. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.11. - Denial of Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room License. 
No Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room license shall be issued or renewed for any business or premises: 
(A)  Where any of the owners or the operators has been convicted within the last five years of any felony or of any misdemeanor involving the operation of a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room business, or involving physical violence, gambling activities, controlled substances, alcoholic beverages, minors or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(B)  Where the premises do not provide off-street parking spaces of a minimum of one (1) parking space for each two (2) machines plus one (1) parking space for each employee on the largest shift; 
(C)  Where the premises are located within 500 feet of any school or church-owned or operated property. 
(D)  Where it is determined that the premises or operation thereof would be in violation of any provision of the Building Code, the Zoning Code or the Fire Code of the City or any other pertinent provisions of local, state or federal law; 
(E)  Where the applicant made a false statement as to a material matter upon the application or in a hearing concerning the license; 
(F)  Where the application failed to provide all of the required information; or 
(G)  Where not all terms and conditions under this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes are complied with. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.12. - Conditions and regulations. 
(A)  In addition to any other condition or regulation contained in this chapter or in state statutes, the following conditions and regulations shall be applicable to and shall govern and control all licenses of sweepstakes terminal cafs and/or skill game rooms: 
(1)  Each such licensee shall at all times open each and every portion of the premises for inspection by the Police Department and other City and County departments for the purposes of enforcing any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Each such licensee shall have present on the premises at all times when the premises are open to the public at least one adult operator who has not been convicted of a felony or of any misdemeanor involving illegal gambling or the illegal operation of a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room. 
(3)  No such licensee shall allow any person, other than an owner or operator over the age of twenty-one years, who shall be readily identifiable, to be in control of the premises, nor allow such operator to be regularly situated in a place upon the premises other than a place from which he has an unobstructed view of the entire portion of the premises devoted to the operation of devices. 
(4)  No person under the age of twenty-one years shall be permitted in a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room. 
(5)  Any and all rules and odds of winning shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the premises and displayed on the device at the start of each game and/or activity. 
(6)  Each such licensee shall operate the sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room business in compliance with any and all pertinent Federal Trade Commission rules and regulations. 
(B)  All devices upon the premises of a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room shall be located thereon in conformity with the floor plan filed with the application for the license and in such a manner: 
(1)  So as not to impair ingress or egress to the premises; 
(2)  So as not to interfere with free and unfettered passage through the premises; 
(3)  So as to permit a clear and complete view of the interior of the premises immediately upon entry; and 
(4)  So that the back of any amusement device is not exposed to a window. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.13. - Prohibited conduct and conditions in Sweepstakes Terminal Cafs and/or Skill Game Rooms. 
No licensee of a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room by himself or herself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee, shall permit or fail to take active steps to eliminate the activities specified in this section from occurring upon the premises. All such licensees shall have a duty to diligently pursue enforcement of this section. The actions of the operator and the failure to take action by the operator shall be imputed to the licensees. No such licensee shall: 
(A)  Permit disorderly conduct upon the premises; 
(B)  Permit the premises to become a gathering place for disorderly persons of any type; 
(C)  Permit the gambling in any form or the possession or use of gambling paraphernalia upon the premises; 
(D)  Permit intoxication or the possession or use of alcoholic beverages upon the premises. 
(E)  Permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug, narcotic or controlled substance; 
(F)  Permit the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or walkways in the immediate vicinity of any entrance or exit to the premises to become littered; 
(G)  Permit the premises or the activity conducted thereon to become a public nuisance to the surrounding environs; 
(H)  Permit the walkways to become obstructed in any manner so that pedestrian traffic is hindered; 
(I)  Permit any devices thereon to be operated at any time the premises is not open for business, or permit the entrance to be locked at any time that the premises are open for business; 
(J)  Permit the premises to become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein or to be in violation of any of the City's Fire, Health or Sanitation Codes; 
(K)  Permit any device to be offered to the public for operation unless fully operable and in safe operation condition; 
(L)  Permit the premises to be open for business without displaying the licenses therefore in a conspicuous place thereon; 
(M)  Permit the operation of any unlicensed device upon the premises; 
(N)  Permit any violation of any ordinance of the City or statute of the State to take place upon the premises. 
(O)  Permit firearms upon the premises. 
(P)  Permit usage of check cashing, loans and credit cards. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.14. - License expiration, suspension or revocation. 
(A)  Expiration. Any sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room license issued under this chapter shall expire upon the transfer or sale of a majority interest in the business, or the discontinuation of the business for a continuous period of thirty days. Any device license issued under this chapter shall expire upon the transfer or sale of such device. 
(B)  Suspension and Revocation. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon its finding of the occurrence of any of the following events; 
(1)  A false statement by any licensee as to a material matter made in an application for license or in a hearing concerning the license; 
(2)  Conviction of a felony or of any misdemeanor involving illegal gambling or the illegal operation of a sweepstakes terminal caf and/or skill game room. 
(3)  Conviction twice within a one-year period of any license or operator for a violation of this chapter. 
(C)  Hearing. The suspension or revocation of any license under this chapter shall not be made without a hearing. The licensee shall be given at least ten days' prior written notice of intent to suspend or revoke, which shall set forth the time and place of the hearing and the specific reasons for such suspension or revocation. The licensee shall have the right at the hearing to present testimony and other relevant evidence and to orally examine any person offering evidence as to the reasons for suspension or revocation. 
(D)  Appeal. The decision of the Board may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction under ORC Ch. 2506. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.15. - License fees. 
(A)  Device. The fee for each device license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per device, per year. 
(B)  Sweepstakes Terminal Caf or Skill Game Room. The fee for a sweepstakes terminal caf or skill game room shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(C)  Replacement License. The fee for a replacement license shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(D)  Filed with Application. License fees under this chapter shall be filed with the application for license. 
(E)  Return of Fee. In the event an application is denied under this chapter, one-half of the license fee therefore shall be returned to the applicant. In the event any license is suspended or revoked under this chapter, no portion of the license fee shall be returned to the owner. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.16. - Equal opportunity. 
No person shall be denied any license or the right to use a licensed amusement device under this chapter in the City because of race, color, creed, sex, religious belief or national origin. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
Sec. 722.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 43-12. Passed 10-11-2012.) 
CHAPTER 729. - WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3-18 ,  I(App. A), adopted Jan. 8, 2018, amended Ch. 729 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 729,  729.01-729.16, 729.99, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 13-90. Passed 3-29-1990. 

Sec. 729.01. - Waste disposal facilities prohibited. 
The operation of waste disposal facilities are prohibited within the limits of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 3-18 . Passed 1-8-2018.) 
Sec. 729.02. - Definition. 
Waste disposal facilities. Establishments primarily engaged in the removing, destroying, or storing of damaged, used or other unwanted products or substances which include, but are not limited to, those that are domestic, agricultural, or industrial. Disposal includes burning burial at landfill sites or at bodies of water, and recycling. 
(Ord. 3-18 . Passed 1-8-2018.) 
Sec. 729.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates the provision of section 729.01 shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 3-18 . Passed 1-8-2018.) 
CHAPTER 730. - CLOTHING DONATION CONTAINERS; RECYCLE BINS 

Sec. 730.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Clothing Donation Container shall include, but is not limited to, any box, building, trailer or other receptacle that is intended for use as a collection point for donated clothing or other donated household materials at times when no employee or representative of the organization or company is present to accept donations. 
(B)  Recycle Bin shall include, but is not limited to, any box, trailer or other receptacle that is intended for use as a collection point for recyclable materials, including but not limited to, glass, paper, aluminum or plastics. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.02. - Requirements. 
No owner or operator of any premises shall place or maintain or permit to be placed or maintained at or on the exterior property areas of such premises any Clothing Donation Containers or Recycle Bin unless and until the following requirements have been met: 
(A)  The owner of the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin, or the host site whose property the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin is situated, must conspicuously post or affix the following information on the container or bin: 
(1)  The name, address and contact telephone number of the organization or company accepting donated items or recycled materials. 
(2)  The name of the company or organization benefiting from the donated items. 
(3)  The valid permit issued by the Engineering, Planning and Zoning Department. 
(B)  All signage on each Clothing Donation Container and Recycle Bin shall be in compliance with Chapter 1143, "Signs", as well as any other applicable provisions of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances. 
(C)  Clothing Donation Containers and Recycle Bins shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Each container and bin shall be serviced and maintained so that it is free of dirt, grease, free of chipped, faded, peeling paint, cracked paint, free of rust and corrosion and free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration. 
(D)  A Clothing Donation Container may only be used as a collection container for clothing. A Recycle Bin may only be used as a collection container for materials intended to be recycled. The collection or storage of other materials, including appliances, mattresses, and/or furniture, is prohibited. 
(E)  The placement of a Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin shall not impede traffic nor visually impair any motor vehicle operation within a parking lot or turning from or onto a public street. 
(F)  A Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin may not be located on a vacant parcel or on a parcel containing a vacant building as defined in Chapter 1320 of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances. 
(G)  A Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bins may not be located on a required building setback, access easement, driveway, parking lane, fire lane, public right-of-way or any area prohibited by the City of Marysville's Planning and Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.03. - Maintenance; enforcement. 
(A)  The organization or company benefitting from the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin will be held primarily responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and servicing of the container. However, in the event the organization or company fails to adequately maintain and service the container, the property owner on whose property the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin is placed shall also be responsible. 
(B)  Clothing Donation Containers shall not exceed seventy-eight (78) inches in height (measured from grade), sixty (60) inches in width and sixty (60) inches in depth. Recycling Bins shall not exceed seventy-eight (78) inches in height (measured from grade), seventy-eight (78) inches in width and seventy-eight (78) inches in depth. 
(C)  Failure to properly maintain the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin may result in enforcement under this chapter or under Section 1319.07, "Exterior Appearance of Premises", of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances in the event of a violation of that codified ordinance. 
(D)  Clothing Donation Containers or Recycling Bins shall be emptied regularly and within forty-eight (48) hours of the primary contact person as (provided on the application filed with the City) being notified by any City official that the Clothing Donation Container or Recycling Bin is full. 
(E)  If a specific Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin has been found to be in violation of any provision of Section 1319.07, "Exterior Appearance of Premises", three (3) or more times in a twelve (12) month period, the City shall cause the container or bin to be removed and disposed of and assess the costs of such removal and disposal against the owner of the property on which the Container or Bin is located. Notice shall be served in accordance with Section 1319.05(B) at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the City removing such Container or Bin. 
(F)  No more than two (2) Clothing Donation Containers and one (1) Recycling Bin shall be permitted on any parcel of property. Any Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin placed or maintained within the City of Marysville that is not first registered in compliance with this chapter shall be subject to impoundment by the City. Any Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin impounded by the City shall be released to the owner upon securing proper registration, and the payment of an impound fee of two hundred ($200.00) dollars. If after 30 days the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin is not retrieved by the proper owner and the impound fee not paid, pursuant to this section, the Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin shall be disposed of pursuant to law. Any items contained therein shall be donated to a local, registered not-for-profit charity. 
(H)  The Engineering, Planning and Zoning Department shall not issue an annual permit to any Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin owner who does not maintain a Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin in accordance with these regulations. The Engineering, Planning and Zoning Department shall not issue an annual permit to any Clothing Donation Container owner who is not a tax-exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3). 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.04. - Permit required; dates of issuance and expiration. 
(A)  A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through December 31 of each year and renewable the following year for a one-year period thereafter. Prior to the expiration of a permit, any owner who intends to place, display or maintain a Clothing Donation Container or Recycle Bin shall obtain a new permit for the next twelve (12) month period. 
(B)  A permit is not required for any Clothing Donation Container which is managed and staffed on site during the regular hours of operation for the business on whose property the Container is placed. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.05. - Application for permit; contents; fees. 
(A)  The applicant shall complete a registration application in such form as to be acceptable to the Engineering, Planning, and Zoning Department. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following; 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the person, business, entity, corporation or organization applying for the permit; 
(2)  The name, telephone number and e-mail address of the party in control of the private property upon which the Container or Bin is to be placed, and written authorization from the party in control of the private property, including the terms of its placement by lease or otherwise; 
(3)  The name, telephone number and e-mail address of the person(s) primarily responsible for placing, emptying, servicing, maintaining and removing the Container(s) or Bin(s); 
(4)  Information as to the schedule and manner by which the Container or Bin is to be emptied and information regarding where the contents or donated items are to be transported. 
(B)  Fees. A twenty-five ($25.00) dollar annual fee per Clothing Donation Container or Recycling Bin shall be paid with the permit application for each year the Container or Bin is placed pursuant to this chapter. The fee shall not be prorated based on the time of year the permit application is filed. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.06. - Relationship to other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the City of Marysville in any way to use any or all means available to remove a nuisance, or summarily eliminate immediate hazards to the public health, safety or welfare as granted in any ordinances of the City of Marysville or the laws or Constitution of the State of Ohio. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
Sec. 730.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and is subject to prosecution and penalty of not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars and not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. 
(Ord. 38-18 . Passed 5-21-2018.) 
CHAPTER 737. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Obscenity and sex offenses, Ch. 533. 

Sec. 737.01. - Definitions. 
(A)  Adult Booth. Any area of a sexually oriented business establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(B)  Adult Material. Any of the following, whether new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally stored materials that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(3)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe specified anatomical areas. 
(C)  City Zoning Ordinances. The part of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville known and referred to as the City of Marysville Planning and Zoning Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(D)  Civic Building or Use. A building or location that provides for community meetings and/or activities including, but not limited to, City Hall, Township Hall, school administration building, recreation center (public or private), property listed on the National Register of Historic Places, Chamber of Commerce building, Arts Council building, library, or other public buildings owned or operated by the City. 
(E)  Commercial Establishment. Any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration. 
(F)  Days. Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter. 
(G)  Licensed Premises. The place or location described in the sexually oriented business establishment license where a sexually oriented business establishment is authorized to operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within the licensed premises. 
(H)  Licensee. Any person or entity that has been issued a sexually oriented business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(I)  Nude or state of nudity. A state of dress or undress that exposes to view (1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(J)  Reviewing Departments. The Director of Administration, Division of Police, and Division of Planning. 
(K)  Semi-nude. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the human genitals, anus, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks. 
(L)  Sexually Oriented Business Commissioner. The Director of Administration, or his/her designee, shall be the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner. 
(M)  Sexually Oriented Business Establishment. A commercial establishment including, but not limited to, adult cabaret, adult store, or adult theater primarily engaged in presenting persons who appear nude/semi-nude, live performances, films or other visual representations, adult booths or sale or display of adult material. 
(1)  Adult Cabaret. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following: 
(a)  Persons who appear nude or semi-nude. 
(b)  Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(c)  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(2)  Adult Store. Any commercial establishment that: 
(a)  Contains one or more adult booths; 
(b)  As a substantial or significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or 
(c)  Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials. 
(3)  Adult Theater. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(N)  Sexually Oriented Business Establishment Employee. Any individual, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises. 
(O)  Sexually Oriented Business Establishment License. A license issued for a sexually oriented business establishment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(P)  Sexually Oriented Business Establishment Patron. A sexually oriented business establishment patron, present in or at any sexually oriented business establishment at any time when such sexually oriented business establishment is open for business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises. 
(Q)  Specified Anatomical Areas. Any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(R)  Specified Criminal Act. Any unlawful, lewd, indecent, or immoral criminal conduct; specifically, but without limitation, the lewd, indecent, or immoral criminal acts specified in any of the following statutes: 
(1)  Chapter 2907 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(2)  Chapter 533 of the Codified Ordinances of Marysville, Ohio. 
(S)  Specified Sexual Activities. Any of the following: 
(1)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence. 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (2) of this definition. 
(T)  Straddle Dance. The use by any person, including specifically but without limitation, a sexually oriented business establishment employee, of any part of his or her body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any sexually oriented business establishment patron or any other person, or the touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any sexually oriented business establishment patron. Conduct shall be a straddle dance regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a straddle dance regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to by the slang terms "lap dance," "table dance," and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of straddle dance. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.02. - Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner. 
The Director of Administration, or his/her designee, is designated the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner. The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall have the following powers and duties: 
(A)  To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance, renewal, suspension, and revocation of sexually oriented business licenses as set forth in this chapter. 
(B)  To conduct or provide for such inspection of sexually oriented businesses as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law. 
(C)  To at least annually review the provisions of this chapter and the conduct and operation of sexually oriented business establishments, and to make such related reports and recommendations to the City Council as the sexually oriented business use commissioner shall deem necessary. 
(D)  To conduct such hearings, studies, and reports on sexually oriented businesses as the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall deem necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the revocation or suspension of a sexually oriented business license as required pursuant to this chapter. 
(E)  To take such further actions as the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner deems necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied by the powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.03. - Sexually Oriented Business Licenses generally. 
(A)  Sexually Oriented Business License Required. A sexually oriented business license shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain a sexually oriented business within the City. 
(B)  Operation Without License Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current and valid sexually oriented business license to establish, operate, or maintain a sexually oriented business within the City at any time after the effective date of this chapter. 
(C)  Operation in Violation of License Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to establish, operate, or maintain a sexually oriented business within the City except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter and the licensee's sexually oriented business license. 
(D)  Content and Display of License. Every sexually oriented business license shall be provided by the City and shall, at a minimum, prominently display on its face the name of the licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. Every licensee shall display the license at all times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that it can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed premises. 
(E)  License Term. Sexually oriented business licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked, for a term of one year commencing on the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making an application. Application for renewal should be made at least forty-five days before the expiration date. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.04. - Form and submittal of license application. 
(A)  Required Form. An application for a sexually oriented business license, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner on a form prescribed by the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner and shall be signed by (1) the applicant, if the applicant is an individual; (2) at least one of the persons entitled to share in the profits of the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations of the organization and the right to bind all other such persons, if the applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization; or (3) by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises for which a sexually oriented business license is sought. Each initial or renewal application shall be accompanied by ten identical copies. 
(B)  Administrative Processing Fee. Every applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall pay an administrative processing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The administrative processing fee shall in all cases be non-refundable. 
(C)  Required Information and Documents. Each application shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  Names of applicants. 
(a)  Individuals. The applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, the applicant's business address and social security number, written proof (driver's license) of the applicant's age (date of birth)-proof that applicant is at least 18 years of age, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's naturalization, and the applicant's federally issued tax identification number. 
(b)  Corporations. The applicant corporation's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of all the directors, officers, and managers of the corporation and of every person owning or controlling more than 20% of the voting shares of the corporation; the corporation's date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed; proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the State of Ohio; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(c)  Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, limited liability companies or any other type of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization. The applicant organization's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of each partner (including limited partners) or any other person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not any such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization. 
(2)  The general character and nature of the business of the applicant. 
(3)  The location, including street address and legal description, and telephone number, of the premises for which the sexually oriented business license is sought. 
(4)  The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the sexually oriented business license. 
(5)  The identity of each fee simple owner of the licensed premises. 
(6)  A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, and the fixed structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however, that each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches and sufficient to show clear compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The requirements of this division shall not apply for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certifies that the licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this division shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other city approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(7)  The specific type or types of sexually oriented business that the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises. 
(8)  A copy of each sexually oriented business license, liquor license, and gaming license currently held by the applicant or any of the individuals identified in the application. 
(9)  The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-today, on-site managers of the proposed sexually oriented business. 
(10)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this ordinance, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. 
(11)  Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this ordinance whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(12)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established residential use or district, school, preschool, daycare, place of worship, synagogue, park, library, federal, state, county, township or city building, cemetery, or other civic use or public use (within the City of Marysville or other jurisdiction), any commercial establishment selling beer or alcohol for consumption on the premises, or any hotel or motel within 500 feet of the property to be certified. For the purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(13)  Any application for a sexually oriented business license that does not include all of the information and documents required pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or processed by the city. The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall, within five days of such submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.05. - Processing of license application. 
(A)  Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business license, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall refer the application to the appropriate City departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall issue a license unless the requirements set forth above are not met. 
(B)  Judicial review may be made pursuant to Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code. All parties shall comply with the Commissioner's decision pending appeal. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.06. - Standards for issuance or denial of license. 
(A)  The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall issue a sexually oriented business license to an applicant if, but only if, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner finds and determines all of the following based on the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by all City departments to which the application has been referred pursuant to Section 737.05 above: 
(1)  All information and documents required by this chapter for issuance of a sexually oriented business license have been properly provided; 
(2)  No person identified in the application has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any criminal act within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  No person identified in the application is overdue on payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed on any such individual in connection with any sexually oriented business. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business and the licensed premises comply with all then-applicable building, health, and safety codes and have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of the Marysville Zoning Code. 
(5)  The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the application that the applicant has read this chapter and all provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance applicable to sexually oriented businesses, that the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the licensed premises and the proposed sexually oriented business establishment and its proposed operation are and shall be in compliance therewith. 
(B)  Denial. If the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner determines that the applicant has not met any one or more of the conditions set forth herein, then the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall deny issuance of the sexually oriented business license and shall give the applicant a written notification and explanation of such denial. The Commissioner will only accept and process to completion one application per location at a time. No new applications for any location will be accepted while an application for this location is the subject of any appeal process. 
(C)  License Deemed Issued. If the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner does not issue or deny the sexually oriented business license within 30 days after the properly completed application is submitted, then the sexually oriented business license applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001; Ord. 30-02. Passed 7-11-2002.) 
Sec. 737.07. - Inspection by the City. 
The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner and other City representatives and departments with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all sexually oriented businesses as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable law. Any Sexually Oriented Business establishment shall be subject to the same lawful health and safety regulations that are applicable to other business establishments within the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 30-02. Passed 7-11-2002.) 
Sec. 737.08. - Change in information. 
During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any sexually oriented business license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner in writing of any change in any material information given by the applicant or licensee in the application for such license, including specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the sexually oriented business establishment or in the individuals identified in the application pursuant to this chapter; or if any of the events constituting grounds for suspension or revocation pursuant to this chapter occur. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.09. - Regulations applicable to all Sexually Oriented Businesses. 
(A)  General Compliance. All licensed premises and sexually oriented business establishments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, and with the provisions of all other applicable city ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(B)  Hours of Operation. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment shall be open for business at any time on any Sunday, State of Ohio or federal holiday. 
(2)  No sexually oriented business establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any day. 
(C)  Animals. No animals, except seeing eye dogs required to assist the blind, shall be permitted at any time or in any sexually oriented business establishment or licensed premises. 
(D)  Restrooms. All restrooms in sexually oriented business establishments shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. No adult materials or live performances shall be provided or allowed at any time in the restrooms of a sexually oriented business establishment. Separate male and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by sexually oriented business establishment employees and patrons. 
(E)  Restricted Access. No sexually oriented business establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of any sexually oriented business establishment, including specifically, but without limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of sexually oriented business employees. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises. These persons shall remain in the non-public areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties. 
(F)  Specific Prohibited Acts. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business employee or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment, other than a sexually oriented business employee employed to provide adult entertainment in accordance with the regulations in this chapter shall appear, be present, or perform while nude or semi-nude; further no such employee shall appear, be present, or perform while nude at any sexually oriented business establishment that serves or otherwise provides alcoholic liquor pursuant to a license issued by the State of Ohio. 
(2)  No sexually oriented business employee or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any sexually oriented business patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment, or any other sexually oriented business employee, or any other person. No sexually oriented business establishment patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any sexually oriented business establishment employee or patron or any other person. 
(3)  Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all sexually oriented business establishments. 
(G)  Exterior Display. No sexually oriented business establishment shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of a sexually oriented business establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights, or spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to Chapter 1143 of the City Planning and Zoning Code with regard to signs. This subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material, decoration, or sign; to any performance or show; and to any window, door, or other opening. 
(H)  Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time. 
(I)  Gambling and Related Devices Prohibited. No sexually oriented business establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeon-hold, pool, or any other games, machines, tables, or implements. 
(J)  Manager's Station. Each sexually oriented business establishment shall have one or more manager's stations. The interior of each sexually oriented business establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager's station to every part of each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any sexually oriented business establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose. 
(K)  Alcohol Prohibition. No sexually oriented business establishment shall serve or otherwise provide beer or alcohol to be sold or consumed on the premises. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.10. - Special regulations for adult booths. 
(A)  Prohibited Except in Adult Stores. Adult booths shall be prohibited in all sexually oriented business establishments except adult stores. 
(B)  Occupancy and Prohibited Acts. Only one individual shall occupy an adult booth at any time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall engage in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(C)  Open Booth Requirement. In addition to satisfying the manager station requirements of this chapter, all adult stores containing adult booths shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each adult booth shall be visible from the common area of the adult store. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entranceway for each adult booth and for the entranceway from the area of the adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store containing the adult booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult booths or any person situated in an adult booth. It shall be unlawful to install adult booths within a sexually oriented business establishment for the purpose of providing secluded viewing of adult materials or live performances. 
(D)  Aisle Required. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in a booth shall be visible at all times from the aisle. 
(E)  Holes Prohibited. Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever. 
(F)  Signage. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each adult booth that states: 
(1)  That only one person is allowed in an adult booth at any one time, 
(2)  That it is unlawful to engage in any specified sexual activities while in an adult booth, and 
(3)  That it is unlawful to damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(G)  Age Limitations. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult booth or a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult booth or at any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration of not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.11. - Special regulations for adult cabarets. 
(A)  Performance Area. The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be limited to one or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a "Cabaret Stage"). Each Cabaret Stage shall be elevated above the level of, and separate from, the patron seating areas. Each Cabaret Stage shall be separated by a distance of at least three (3) feet from all areas of the premises to which sexually oriented business establishment patrons have access. A continuous barrier at least two feet in height and located at least three (3) feet from all points of each Cabaret Stage shall separate each Cabaret Stage from all patron seating areas. No adult patron shall be allowed at any time on any Cabaret Stage. 
(B)  Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less than 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret where sexually oriented business establishment patrons are admitted. 
(C)  Tipping. No sexually oriented business establishment patron shall offer, and no sexually oriented business establishment employee having performed on any Cabaret Stage shall accept any form of tip or gratuity offered directly or personally to the employee by the sexually oriented business establishment patron. Rather, all tips and gratuities to sexually oriented business establishment employees performing on any Cabaret Stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the sexually oriented business establishment or shall be placed by the sexually oriented business establishment patron on the Cabaret Stage on which the sexually oriented business establishment employee is performing. 
(D)  Notice of Select Rules. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters of at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to every Cabaret Stage stating the following: 
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF MARYSVILLE. ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
(1)  NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. 
(2)  NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY FROM PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT OR MUST BE PLACED DIRECTLY ON THE CABARET STAGE. 
(E)  Notice of Alcohol Policy. No beer or alcohol shall be sold or consumed on the premises. 
(F)  Age Limitations. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult cabaret or a licensed premises used for an adult cabaret shall be under the age of 21. 
(2)  No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult cabaret or to any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(3)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.12. - Special regulations for adult stores. 
(A)  Windows. Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered or obstructed in any way. 
(B)  Age Limitations. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult store or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult store or to any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.13. - Special regulations for adult theaters. 
(A)  Seating. Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches, benches, or any other multiple person seating structures. The number of seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the adult theater. 
(B)  Aisle. Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
(C)  Sign. Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area. 
(D)  Age Limitations. 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult theater or a licensed premises used for an adult theater shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult theater or to any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.14. - Licensee responsibility for employees. 
Every act or omission by a sexually oriented business establishment employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the sexually oriented business establishment employee. The licensee shall be punished for any such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any such act or omission of any such employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the licensee's sexually oriented business establishment license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed, to be the act or omission of the licensee. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.15. - License revocation or suspension. 
(A)  Grounds. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner may suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke, any sexually oriented business establishment license if the commissioner, based on credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that any one or more of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or the sexually oriented business establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or the provisions of the City Zoning Code applicable to the licensed premises or the sexually oriented business establishment. 
(2)  The licensee knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading information or withheld information on any application or other document submitted to the city for the issuance or renewal of any sexually oriented business establishment license or knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other person to furnish or withhold any such information on the licensee's behalf. 
(3)  The licensee has committed or knowingly or negligently allowed a felony or specified criminal act to take place on the licensed premises. 
(4)  The licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the sexually oriented business establishment, allows a sexually oriented business establishment employee, a sexually oriented business establishment patron, or any other person to violate any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of the provisions or requirements of the sexually oriented business establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or, commit any felony or specified criminal act on the licensed premises. The licensee, or any person identified in this chapter becomes disqualified for the issuance of a sexually oriented business establishment license at any time during the term of the license at issue. 
(B)  Procedure. A sexually oriented business establishment license may be suspended for not more than 30 days or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this division. 
(1)  Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for suspension or revocation under subsection (A) hereof may exist, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall serve a written notice on the licensee in person or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. The written notice shall, at a minimum, state that the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner has determined that the sexually oriented business establishment license may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to this chapter; identify the specific grounds for the commissioner's determination; and set a date for a hearing regarding the commissioner's determination as to the possibility of suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business establishment license. The date of the hearing shall be no less than five days after service of the Commissioner's notice, unless an earlier or later date is agreed to by the licensee and the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner. 
(2)  Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner. At the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner for suspending or revoking the license and the city and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain such grounds. The administrative record compiled on the sexually oriented business establishment pursuant to this chapter shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three days after the close of the hearing, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall, having considered the record made at the hearing, render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code. The sexually oriented business establishment may remain in operation pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(3)  Notice and Effective Date of Suspension or Revocation. The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner's written decision shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. Any suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the day that the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner's written decision is delivered in person or three days after it is placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection. 
(4)  Surrender of License. Upon the suspension or revocation of sexually oriented business establishment license pursuant to this chapter, the Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.16. - Administrative record. 
The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall cause to be kept in the commissioner's office an accurate record of every sexually oriented business establishment license application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material pertaining to such application, any sexually oriented business establishment license issued pursuant thereto, and any sexually oriented business establishment operated pursuant to such sexually oriented business establishment license. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.17. - Record keeping by licensee. 
The licensee of every sexually oriented business establishment shall maintain a register of all of its sexually oriented business establishment employees. For each such employee, the register shall include the following information: 
(A)  Legal name. 
(B)  Any and all aliases. 
(C)  Date of birth. 
(D)  Gender. 
(E)  Social security number. 
(F)  Date of commencement of employment. 
(G)  Date of employment termination, if applicable. 
(H)  Specific job or employment duties. 
The register shall be maintained for all current employees and all employees employed at any time during the preceding 36 months. The licensee shall make the register of its sexually oriented business establishment employees available for inspection by the city immediately upon demand at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.18. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of any of the provisions or requirements of any sexually oriented business establishment license, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Sexually Oriented Business Use Commissioner shall give written notice to any such person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.19. - Nuisance declared. 
Any sexually oriented business establishment established, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of any sexually oriented business establishment license shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining a sexually oriented business establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
Sec. 737.20. - Computation of time. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, the time within which any act required by this chapter is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a Federal or State of Ohio holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. If the day immediately following such Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 10-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
CHAPTER 738. - CONCESSIONS, CARNIVALS AND FAIRS 

Sec. 738.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Amusement ride means any mechanical device, aquatic device, or combination of devices that carries or conveys passengers on, along, around, over or through a fixed or restricted course or within a defined area for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, or excitement. "Amusement ride includes carnival rides, bungee jumping facilities, and fair rides but does not include passenger tramways as defined in ORC 4169.01 or amusement rides operated solely at trade shows for a limited period of time. 
(B)  Carnival means an enterprise, lasting more than three (3) consecutive days or 72 hours, that offers an amusement or entertainment to the public by means of one or more amusement rides or concessions. 
(C)  Carnival worker means a person who is employed by or at a carnival or fair to manage, physically operate, or assist in the operation of an amusement ride or amusement attraction when it is open to the public, including, but not limited to, workers who are responsible for cleaning restrooms on fair grounds. 
(D)  Concession means any show, game, or novelty stands operation at a fair or carnival, including, but not limited to, food or drink operations. 
(E)  Concession worker means a person who is employed by or at a carnival or fair to manage, physically operate, or assist in the operation of a concession when it is open to the public. 
(F)  Employ means to hire, make use of, to engage the services of a person, whether paid or unpaid, within the City. 
(G)  Fair means an enterprise, lasting more than three (3) consecutive days or 72 hours, principally devoted to the exhibition of products of agriculture or industry in connection with which amusement rides or amusement attractions are operated. 
(H)  Operator means a person, or the agent of a person, who owns or controls or has the duty to control the operation of an amusement ride or an amusement attraction at a carnival or fair. Operator includes an agency of the State or any of its political subdivisions. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.02. - License required. 
No operator shall operate any concession or amusement ride at any fair or carnival within the City without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.03. - Term; display. 
Upon approval of the license application by the Director of Administration, the Director shall issue a license. Such license shall be displayed by the operator in a prominent location at the fair or carnival, and shall be valid during the term issued. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.04. - Refusal to issue license. 
The Director of Administration shall decline to issue a license for any concession or amusement ride if the operator is not in compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.05. - Revocation. 
The license issued for any concession or amusement ride may be revoked by the Director of Administration upon a finding by the Director of probable cause that there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.06. - License requirements. 
(A)  Any operator seeking a license to operate a concession or amusement ride at any fair or carnival within the City shall: 
(1)  Provide a complete and accurate list to the Director of Administration of all persons or carnival and concession workers who are or will be employed by or at any concession or amusement ride. Said list shall accurately state the name, home address, date of birth and social security number of all employees or carnival or concession workers who will be employed at the fair or carnival by the licensee. 
(2)  Not employ any person or carnival or concession worker who has not been listed by the licensee above. 
(3)  Within 24 hours of a request by the Chief of Police or any law enforcement officer, provide proof to the Director of Administration that an employee, carnival or concession worker has been listed in accordance with subsection (A)(1) hereof. 
(B)  The Director of Administration shall provide the list to the Chief of Police who shall cause a felony warrant and sex offender background check to be conducted on all persons listed by the operator as employees or carnival or concession workers. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
Sec. 738.99. - Penalty. 
Any operator who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense; and a misdemeanor of the first degree on any subsequent conviction of this chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 501.99 of the Marysville City Ordinances. Each day an operator is in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 37-09. Passed 11-19-2009.) 
CHAPTER 739. - EMINENT DOMAIN 

Sec. 739.01. - Eminent Domain. 
(A)  The City shall not use its power of eminent domain to appropriate, without the owner's consent, private property when the primary purpose for the appropriation is to promote private economic development and the appropriation is intended to result in long-term use of the property by another private person or entity, unless approved by a three-quarters vote of all members elected to Council. This restriction requiring three-quarters affirmative vote by all members elected to Council only applies to the taking of property by eminent domain for the purpose of economic development. Appropriating property for any other lawful purpose or use is governed by Ohio law. 
(B)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of eminent domain where the property is located in a blighted area as defined in Chapter 1319 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville. 
(C)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to excess land appropriated in furtherance of a public use as permitted by Article XVIII, Section 10 of the Ohio Constitution. 
(D)  The provisions of this section shall not otherwise restrict the Council's authority to appropriate private land as necessary for public uses as permitted by Article XVIII, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Ohio Constitution and Chapter 719 of the Ohio Revised Code, except as outlined in subsections (A) and (B), above. 
(Ord. 81-05. Passed 12-15-2005.) 
CHAPTER 741. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 

Sec. 741.01. - Definitions. 
(A)  Marijuana has the same meaning as Marihuana as defined in Section 3719.01 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(B)  Medical Marijuana means marijuana that is cultivated, processed, dispensed, tested, possessed, or used for a medical purpose. 
(Ord. 32-17 . Passed 7-24-2017.) 
Sec. 741.02. - Cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana prohibited. 
(A)  The cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana within the City of Marysville is hereby prohibited. 
(B)  This section does not prohibit research related to marijuana conducted at a state university, academic medical center, or private research and development organization as part of a research protocol approved by an institutional review board or equivalent entity, if otherwise permitted by State law or rule, or local ordinance. 
(Ord. 32-17 . Passed 7-24-2017.) 
Sec. 741.99. - Penalties. 
(A)  Whoever violates Section 741.02(A) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day of the violation shall constitutes a separate offense. 
(B)  In addition to other penalties provided by law, the Director of Law shall be authorized to institute civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin violations of a provision(s) of this chapter; for monetary damages arising from violations of a provision(s) of this chapter; and to take all actions necessary to secure enforcement of any injunction and collect upon any damage award, judgment or fine in contempt levied in relation to a violation of a provision(s) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 32-17 . Passed 7-24-2017.) 
PART NINE - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE 
  
TITLE ONE - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
CHAPTER 900. - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General Code definitions,  101.02. 

Sec. 900.01. - Definitions. 
These definitions are used for Chapters 901 through Chapter 945: 
(A)  Interpretation of Words or Terms. For the purposes of this Part Nine, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(2)  The present tense shall include the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular, and words of any gender shall include all genders. 
(3)  The word shall is a mandatory requirement; may is a permissive requirement; and the word should is a preferred requirement. 
(4)  The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied . 
(B)  Specific Definitions. The word lot includes the words plot and parcel . 
(1)  Adjacent buildings means a group of two or more buildings on the same lot or parcel of land not separated by any street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley or other public Right-of-Way, except where the customer owns and/or leases a lot or parcel of land on both sides of a street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley or public Right-of-Way which lots or parcels of land otherwise would be contiguous, such buildings thereon shall be considered adjacent. 
(2)  Affiliate means each Person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (A) each Person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a Provider, (B) each Person in which a Provider has, directly or indirectly a controlling interest, (C) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of fifteen percent (15%) or more, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of a Provider, and (D) each Person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Provider; provided that Affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than fifteen percent (15%) of such Provider, or any creditor of such Provider solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an Affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, such Provider. 
(3)  ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
(4)  Applicant means a person owning the property on which service is being requested or any Person who seeks to obtain a Certificate of Registration and/or a Permit. 
(5)  Application means a form which shall be completed by a person requesting installation of a customer service line or to obtain Certificate of Registration and/or a Permit. 
(6)  Application Fee means the fee paid to the City for application for a Certificate of Registration pursuant to Section 901.03(A). 
(7)  Backwater Valve means a device installed and maintained by the property owner to protect the private property from sewage backups due to surcharged sewers. 
(8)  Bankruptcy Code means the United States Bankruptcy Code of 1978, as amended including regulations promulgated by Title 11 of the United States Code. 
(9)  Best Effort(s) means the best reasonable efforts under the circumstances, taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable Laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available technology, human resources, and cost. 
(10)  Best Management Practices (BMPs) means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems (as listed in OAC 3745-3-04). BMP's also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
(11)  BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter as prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136. 
(12)  Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other plumbing pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the owner service lateral beginning three feet outside the building wall. 
(13)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(14)  Cable Franchise means the same as franchise in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522. 
(15)  Cable Operator means the same as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522. 
(16)  Cable Service means the same as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522. 
(17)  Capacity Fee means the utility connection fee charged to the owner/developer at the time of connection based on water meter size (see Section 925 Wastewater Rates and Section 931 Water Rates). These fee shall go towards the facilities such as Water Treatment Plant, Water Reclamation Facility and all other related infrastructure. 
(18)  Clearing means any activity that removes vegetative cover. 
(19)  Certificate of Registration means the document issued to each Provider and its unique System to occupy the Rights-of-Way within the City that outlines the terms of that occupancy of the Rights-of-Way. 
(20)  City means the City of Marysville, Ohio, acting through its duly authorized officials and employees. 
(21)  City Code (or C.O.) means the Codified Ordinances of Marysville, Ohio. 
(22)  City Water Service Line means the portion of the water service from the water main to the curb box. 
(23)  Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
(24)  Combined service or common service means a service line intended, in whole or in part, to provide water and/or wastewater service to more than one building or structure and which may be owned by more than one person. 
(25)  Commercial occupant means all persons, firms or corporations who own or operate stores, restaurants, industries, institutions and other similar places, public or private, charitable or non-charitable, and includes all responsible persons other than householders, upon the premises of which garbage or other refuse, or both, is or are created. 
(26)  Commercial user means any user of the wastewater system, not specifically categorized as residential or industrial, and generally classified in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual in Division F Wholesale Trade; Division G Retail Trade; Division H Finance, Insurance and Real Estate; portions of Division I Services; and Division J Public Administration. 
(27)  Compatible pollutants means pollutants which the Water Reclamation Facility was designed to treat, which are BOD, SS, phosphorus, ammonia (NH3) and fecal coliform bacteria plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and if fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
(28)  Confidential/Proprietary Information means all information that has been either identified or clearly marked as confidential/proprietary by the Provider prior to any submission. Upon receipt of such clearly marked Confidential/Proprietary Information from a Provider, the City shall endeavor, in accordance with the requirements of ORC Chapter 149 (the Ohio Public Records Act), to use all the same reasonable measures and exercise the same degree of care that the City uses to protect its own information of such a nature from disclosure to third parties. In the event that the City receives a request from a third party for disclosure of information a Provider has clearly marked as Confidential/Proprietary Information, then the City shall respond as required by ORC Chapter 149, but will attempt to use all reasonable means to notify the Provider as soon as possible. 
(29)  Construct means, but not be limited to, digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs or installing Facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the Rights-of-Way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the Right-of-Way. 
(30)  Construction means, but not limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs or installing Facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the Rights-of-Way. Construction shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is part of the Right-of-Way. This shall also include activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits that result in land disturbance of one acre or more. 
(31)  Construction Bond means a bond posted to ensure proper and complete Construction and/or repair of a Facility and the affected Rights-of-Way pursuant to a Permit. 
(32)  Construction and Major Maintenance Plan means a written plan including maps of the expected location, design, other related equipment and Facilities of a Provider which describes in full the Construction intended to be accomplished by the Provider in the Rights-of-Way over the next calendar year. 
(33)  Construction Activity Permit means the Permit specified in Section 901.13 et seq. which must be obtained before a Person may Construct in, locate in, occupy, maintain, move or remove Facilities from, in or on the Rights-of-Way. 
(34)  Cost means the expenditure by the City for labor, materials, engineering, supervision, vehicles, tools and equipment, and any other expenditures incidental thereto to the extent that any or all of such items are directly assignable to the particular situation involved, except when modified by the word estimated in which case it shall be the estimated expenditure for such item. 
(35)  Consumption means the amount of water passing through the customer's meter (or for billing purposes, estimated to have passed through such meter). 
(36)  County means Union County, Ohio. County specifically excludes any and all contractors, agents or other Persons acting on behalf of said County. 
(37)  Credible means worthy of being believed. 
(38)  Current Rate means the on-time rates established by the City Code (Section 925, Wastewater Rates, and Section 931, Water Rates). 
(39)  Customer means a person who has contracted for utility service to one's premises. 
(40)  Customer Equivalent means the proposed water meter capacity when compared to the capacity of a standard single-family water meter (?"). 
(41)  Customer Service Line means the portion of water service line that is the sole responsibility of the property owner, typically located between the curb box to the water meter. 
(42)  Debt service means the funds used for the retirement of and interest on bonds and/or notes authorized and issued by the City to construct utility system facilities. 
(43)  Detention Facility. A facility, by means of a single control point, which provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff in ponds, parking lots, depressed areas, rooftops, buried underground vaults or tanks, etc., for future release, and is used to delay and attenuate flow. 
(44)  Developer. A person, firm or corporation that presumes to excavate or fill, build structures or otherwise improve a specific parcel or tract of land. 
(45)  Discharger is used interchangeably with user and means those premises connected or required to be connected to the public sewer. A discharger where the context requires, means person . 
(46)  Domestic sewage means sewage derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions and the like, which sewage originated within the building, and includes the waste from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms, showers and laundries. 
(47)  Drainage Facilities means various drainage works that may include pipes, manholes, energy dissipation structures, channels, outlets, retention/detention basins and other structure components. 
(48)  Dwelling, Multi-family means a residential structure that contains two or more units and is typically not attached to the accompanying real property. 
(49)  Dwelling, Single Family means a residential structure that contains one unit and is attached to real property. 
(50)  Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. These rights include the ability for the City to enter upon the dedicated easement area to perform all tasks necessary for the purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining, inspecting, repairing, renewing, removing and replacing said public utilities (including drainageways) and appurtenances. 
(51)  Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property. 
(52)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
(53)  Exclusive Service Area means the area located within Union County that the City has been designated as the water and wastewater service provider. This area is delineated as Area E within Exhibit 4 of the Second Amendment to and Amended and Restated Article Two of the Asset Purchase Agreement dated December 19, 2005 (i.e., City and County Utility Purchase Agreement). 
(54)  Facility(ies) means any tangible thing located in any Rights-of-Way within the City; but shall not include boulevard plantings, ornamental plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the Rights-of-Way between a Person's property and the street edge of pavement. 
(55)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto. 
(56)  FERC means the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as created and amended in accordance with the Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 792, or its statutory successor. 
(57)  Fire protection service : 
(a)  Private fire protection service means all fire protection service furnished by the City at the customer's request, other than public fire protection service. Private fire protection service includes, but is not necessarily limited to, water service to a customer's fire protection facilities such as sprinkler system and/or fire hose connections in buildings and structures and fire hydrants other than those which qualify as public fire hydrants within the definition of public fire protection service. 
(b)  Public fire protection service means water service to fire hydrants which are operated and maintained by the City. 
(58)  Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection system. 
(59)  FOG means Fats, Oils and Grease or any substance with similar physical characteristics that are detectable on the basis of their common solubility to an organic solvent. 
(60)  Foundation drains means subsurface drains laid around the foundation of a building, either within or outside the building foundation, for the purpose of carrying ground or subsurface water to some point of disposal. 
(61)  Full means unable to accommodate any additional Facilities as determined by the City following a reasonable analysis taking into consideration all applicable Law; commonly accepted industry standards; and routine engineering practices. 
(62)  Garbage means all putrescible wastes, except human excreta, sewage and other water-carried wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, and wastes including glass, crockery, tin cans and other containers from the preparation, cooking and serving of food, and shall include all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
(63)  Governmental user means any Federal, State, County, City, Village or political subdivision thereof. 
(64)  Grading means the excavation or placement of fill material to achieve plan design. 
(65)  Grass Waterway means a natural or constructed watercourse or outlet that is shaped or graded, and planted with suitable vegetation for the purpose of dispersing runoff without causing erosion. 
(66)  Growth Area means the area located within Union County that has been targeted with the ability to annex to the City, when contiguous to the corporation limits. This area is delineated as Area F within Exhibit 4 of the Second Amendment to and Amended and Restated Article Two of the Asset Purchase Agreement dated December 19, 2005 (i.e., City and County Utility Purchase Agreement) 
(67)  Hazardous Materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(68)  Householder means the head of a family or one maintaining separate living quarters and includes owners, tenants and occupants of all premises where garbage or other refuse, or both, is or are created. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to commercial occupants. 
(69)  Illegal Discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system. 
(70)  Illicit Connections is defined as either of the following: 
(a)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater discharge including wastewater, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(71)  Impervious Surface means surfaces on or in a lot or parcel of real property which reduce the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth (i.e., pavement, sidewalks, rooftops, etc.). 
(72)  In when used in conjunction with Rights-of-Way, means in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through a Rights-of-Way. 
(73)  Industrial user means any non-governmental user of the publicly owned treatment works identified in the SIC Manual of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: Division A Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B Mining; Division D Manufacturing; Division E Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Service; and Division I Services. A user in a division listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(74)  Industrial waste means the liquid- and water-carried wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as distinct from domestic wastes. 
(75)  Inspector means any Person authorized by the City to carry out inspections related to the provisions of Chapter 901. 
(76)  Institutional user means any hospital, school, nursing home or similar facility. 
(77)  Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the publicly owned treatment work's (POTW) wastewater system, water distribution system, treatment processes or operations which may contribute to a violation of any requirement of its NPDES permit or the discontinuance, temporary or otherwise, of service to a customer, or which may contribute to a violation of any requirement of the public water systems permits. 
(78)  Law means any local, state and/or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff or other requirement in effect either at the time of execution of Chapter 901 or at any time during the location of, and/or while a Provider's Facilities are located in the public Rights-of-Way. 
(79)  May is permissive; shall is mandatory. 
(80)  Mayor means the duly elected Mayor of The City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(81)  Minor Maintenance Permit means a Permit, which must be obtained before a Person can perform minor maintenance, as set forth in Section 901.15, in or on the Rights-of-Way. 
(82)  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm sewer) owned and operated by the City of Marysville and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
(83)  National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1347), which regulation applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
(84)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means the permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
(85)  Natural outlet means outlets, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
(86)  New source means any building, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(b)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site; 
i.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (a) or (b) hereof; 
ii.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
iii.  Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
iv.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
v.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
vi.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. 
(87)  Non-Stormwater Discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(88)  Non-Wastewater flow means stormwater originating from downspouts, storm sewer, ground water drain tiles and foundation drains. 
(89)  Normal sewage means sewage which, when analyzed, shows by weight a daily average of not more than 250 parts per million of suspended solids and not more than 200 parts per million of BOD. 
(90)  OEPA means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(91)  OMUTCD means the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices which is the uniform system of traffic control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of Transportation pursuant to ORC 4511.09. 
(92)  ORC means the Revised Code of the State of Ohio. 
(93)  Ohio Utility Protection Service (OUPS) means the utility protection service as defined in ORC 153.64 and/or 3781.26 or a statutory successor thereto. 
(94)  Open Video Service means any video programming Services provided to any Person through the use of Rights-of-Way, which Person is certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant to  651 et seq. of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of the facilities used. 
(95)  Operation and maintenance costs means the costs incurred in the act of keeping all facilities for collecting, distributing, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and or water in a good state of repair and functioning properly, including the replacement of such facilities when necessary. 
(96)  Operator of Record as designated by the Ohio EPA whose primary responsibility is to provide oversight of the technical operation of the treatment works and wastewater collection water distribution system in accordance with the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(97)  Other refuse means ashes, glass, crockery and tin cans not used as containers in the preparation, cooking and serving of food, and paper, boxes, rags and old clothing and all similar non-putrescible wastes. This term shall not include any material such as earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or other similar substances that may be accumulated as a result of construction operations. 
(98)  Owner means to have control over or possess as property. 
(99)  Owner Service Lateral means the private extension from the building plumbing to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(100)  Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) 
(101)  pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
(102)  Permit means a Construction Permit or a Minor Maintenance Permit, as the context requires. 
(103)  Permit Cost means all direct, incidental and indirect costs actually incurred or realized by the City for Permit issuance, Permit oversight and pavement degradation resulting from Construction activity. 
(104)  Permit Fee means money paid to the City for a Permit to Construct in the Rights-of-Way as required by Chapter 901. 
(105)  Permittee means any Person to whom a Construction Permit and/or, Minor Maintenance Permit has been granted by the City and not revoked. 
(106)  Person means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
(107)  Phosphorus means the total phosphorus content of a sample, including all of the orthophosphates and condensed phosphates, both soluble and insoluble and organic and inorganic species, and referred to in 40 CFR Part 136 as total phosphorus. 
(108)  Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
(109)  POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
(110)  Premises means the physical property to be serviced. Each of the following, together with the lot or parcel of land upon which it is located or such portion of such land as is used or held for use with it, shall constitute a premises: 
(a)  One building designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence. 
(b)  One building designed or used for single-family occupancy both as a residence and for professional or business purposes, when the business or profession is conducted by the resident. (When not so conducted, the portion occupied by the resident constitutes one premises and each separate portion occupied by other persons for professional or business purposes constitutes a separate premises.) 
(c)  A combination of adjacent buildings, one portion designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence and the other portions designed for professional or business purposes, all of which are occupied by the resident. (When not so occupied, the portion designed or used for single-family occupancy constitutes one premises and each separate portion designed or used for professional or business purposes and occupied by other persons constitutes a separate premises.) 
(d)  One building designed or used by one person for professional or business purposes. 
(e)  A combination of adjacent buildings designed or used by one person for professional or business purposes. 
(f)  Each combination of rooms designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence, within a multiple unit building. 
(g)  Each room or combination of rooms designed or used by one person for professional or business purposes within a house or within a multiple unit building. 
(h)  Each parcel of land which requires water service. 
(i)  Each trailer or mobile home unit where the unit is not resting primarily on its wheels. 
(j)  Any building not otherwise defined as a premises in any other definition of premises contained herein. 
(111)  Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. 
(112)  Pretreatment Standards means any limitations or restrictions imposed upon the discharge to the sewer from non-domestic users, in order to prevent: 
(a)  Pass through; 
(b)  Interferences; 
(c)  Harm to the sewers or treatment works; 
(d)  Adverse effect on the receiving stream; 
(e)  Inhibition of sludge disposal options; 
(f)  Violations of the NPDES permit; 
(g)  Endangerment of the health or safety of POTW workers or the public; 
(h)  Endangerment of public property; or 
(i)  Creation of a nuisance. 
i.  Pretreatment standards include categorical pretreatment standards and any local limitations and prohibitions established by the City to fulfill the pretreatment program requirements contained in the City NPDES permit. 
(113)  Private means owner (non-City) maintained infrastructure. 
(114)  Properly shredded garbage means wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(115)  Provider means a Person who owns or operates a System and has a valid Certificate of Registration. The City, County, Schools, Cable Operators operating pursuant to a valid Cable Franchise, or Video Service Provider operating pursuant to a valid Video Service Authorization shall also be considered Providers. 
(116)  Public sewer system means any sewer owned by the City including storm, sanitary and combined sewers. 
(117)  Public water system means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport, treat and distribute consumable water. See also Water Treatment Plant . 
(118)  PUCO means the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as defined in ORC 4901.02. 
(119)  Registration Maintenance Fee means the money paid to the City to maintain a Certificate of Registration and compensate the City for all actual costs incurred by the City in the management, administration and control of the Rights-of-Way of the City, and which are not reasonably recoverable by the City through Construction Permit Fees or other approved recovery mechanisms. 
(120)  Removal Bond means a bond posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to remove a Provider's Facilities upon abandonment or disuse, or discontinuance of a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way. 
(121)  Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
(122)  Residential means all one to three family residences within the City Corporation limits. Multi-family residential units containing more than three family units within one building shall be included where the City determines they cannot be serviced by a dumpster. 
(123)  Restoration means the process and the resultant effects by which a Rights-of-Way is returned to a condition as good as or better than its condition immediately prior to the Construction. Restoration shall occur in accordance with the Rules and Regulations as may be enacted or amended from time to time. 
(124)  Right(s)-of-Way means the surface and space in, above, within, over below, under or through any real property in which the City has an interest in Law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, conduit, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the City that, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing, or replacing a System. Rights-of-Way shall not include buildings, parks, or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a Permit or by Law. 
(125)  Right(s)-of-Way Cost means all direct, incidental and indirect costs borne by the City for the management and administration of the Rights-of-Way and this chapter. 
(126)  Rule(s) and Regulation(s) means any rules or regulations adopted by the City pursuant to Section 901.05(E). 
(127)  Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted. 
(128)  Schools means the Marysville Exempted Village School District. Schools specifically exclude any and all contractors, agents or other Persons acting on behalf of said Schools. 
(129)  Sedimentation means the processes that operate at or near the surface of the ground to deposit soils, debris and other materials either on the ground surfaces or in water channels or the action of deposition of sediment that is determined to have been caused by erosion. 
(130)  Sediment Control means the measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
(131)  Service(s) means the offering of any service or Utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision (for a fee or otherwise) of any service or Utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public that in the opinion of the City constitutes a service. 
(132)  Sewage means the combination of liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including polluted cooling water). 
(133)  Sewer service charge means the total charge levied against users of the wastewater system for sewer service. The rate shall include user charges plus the cost of debt service. 
(134)  Slug load means any pollutant, including oxygen demand pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of sufficient volume or strength to cause interference to the POTW. 
(135)  Significant Industrial User (SIU) means: 
(a)  All dischargers subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under Section 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, as amended; and 
(b)  All non-categorical dischargers that, in the opinion of the City have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the Water Reclamation Facility's operation, or that contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather capacity of the Water Reclamation Facility, or that discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW. However, the City need not designate as significant any non-categorical industrial user that, in the opinion of the City, has no potential for adversely affecting the Water Reclamation Facility's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. The agreement of the OEPA is not necessary in cases where the non-categorical discharger would have been designated as significant only because of an average discharge of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater. However, any non-categorical industrial user designated as significant may petition the City to be deleted from the list of significant users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the Water Reclamation Facility's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(136)  Siltation means the accumulation of fine earth or sand carried by moving or running water and deposited as sediment. 
(137)  Site means a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
(138)  Stormwater Credit means a reduction in a customer's stormwater service fee, other than single family, given for certain qualifying activities which reduce either the impact of increased stormwater runoff or reduces the City's costs of providing stormwater management. 
(139)  Stormwater Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) is a value based on the parameters used in the Stormwater Management Utility rate structure which represents a unit of stormwater runoff. This value is used to facilitate comparison of the number of billing units of non-residential properties. Each ERU is equivalent to 2,700 square feet of impervious area and all residential single-family properties shall be assigned a value of one (1) ERU. 
(140)  Stormwater means the stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
(141)  Stormwater System means all man-made drainage facilities, structures and natural watercourses used for collecting and transporting stormwater, surface runoff and drainage but which excludes wastewater and industrial waste, other than unpolluted cooling water to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, creeks, channels, catch basins, ditches, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, retention or detention basins, dams, floodwalls, levees and pumping stations. 
(142)  Stormwater Utility means the utility is responsible for providing public stormwater management to citizens and/or consumers. The Utility is comprised of structures, equipment, personnel, and processes required for the stormwater system. 
(143)  Subsurface Water Drainage means the process of directing excess water away from the root zones of plants by natural or artificial means, such as by using a system of pipes and drains placed below ground surface level. 
(144)  Supplementary Application means any application made to Construct on or in more of the Rights-of-Way than previously allowed, or to extend a Permit that had already been issued. 
(145)  Surface Water Drainage means the diversion or orderly removal of excess surface water by the development of surface water inlets to subsurface drains, and the slope of the land utilizing systems of natural or constructed channels to carry away the surplus water. 
(146)  Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, municipal waste or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
(147)  System means any System of conduit, cables, ducts, pipes, wires, lines, towers, antennae, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams and any associated converters, equipment or Facilities or Utilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, delivering or distributing Services within the City. A System shall specifically include, but not necessarily be limited to: electric distribution and/or transmission systems, natural or artificial gas distribution and/or transmission systems, water distribution systems, storm sewer systems, sanitary sewer systems, cable television systems, video service networks, telecommunications systems (whether voice, video, data, or other), fiber optic systems, and wireless communications systems. 
(148)  System Representative means the specifically identified agent/employee of a Provider who is authorized to direct field activities of that Provider and serve as official notice agent for System related information. Any such System Representative shall be required to be available at all times to receive notice of and immediately direct response to System related emergencies or situations. 
(149)  Toter means the garbage recycling containers provided by the City's Collection and Transportation of Garbage/Refuse, Recyclables and Disposal Services Contractor. 
(150)  Toxic substance means any of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (U.S. EPA) 126 priority pollutants or other compounds designated by the City or the U.S. EPA, which pollutants can: 
(a)  Interfere with the operation of the municipal treatment works; 
(b)  Contribute significantly to sludge management problems; or 
(c)  Pass through the treatment works with removals that would be unacceptable if the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) were, an industrial direct discharger. 
(151)  Transfer means the disposal by the Provider, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of fifty-one percent (51%) or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the System, or fifty-one percent (51%) cumulatively over the term of a Certificate of Registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association or Person or group of Persons acting in concert. 
(152)  Treatment Works mean any and all devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the useful life of the works, including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof, elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste in sanitary sewer systems. 
(153)  Trenchless Technology means, but not be limited to, the use of directional boring, horizontal drilling, micro tunneling and other techniques in the Construction of underground portions of Facilities which result in the least amount of disruption and damage to Rights-of-Way as possible. 
(154)  Underground Facility(ies) means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults and any other Facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath Rights-of-Way. 
(155)  Unused Facility(ies) means facilities located in the Rights-of-Way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the Provider is unable to provide the City with a Credible plan detailing the procedure by which the Provider intends to begin actively using such Facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the Facilities who will be actively using the Facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that the availability of such Facilities is required by the Provider to adequately and efficiently operate its System. 
(156)  User means any person who discharges or who causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the wastewater treatment system. 
(157)  User charge means the charge assessed against users of the wastewater system to recover the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection water distribution and wastewater water treatment system and the cost of rendering bills and collecting sewer water service charges. 
(158)  Utility(ies) means any water, sewer, gas, drainage, sprinkler or culvert pipe and any electric power, telecommunications, signal communications, cable television or video service provider conduit, fiber, wire, cable, or an operator thereof. 
(159)  Utility Corridor(s) means those specific areas of the Rights-of-Way designated as such by the City pursuant to Section 901.03(F)(1). 
(160)  Video Service means the same as video service in ORC 1332.21(J). 
(161)  Video Service Authorization (or VSA) means a video service authorization as issued to a Video Service Provider by the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce in accordance ORC 1332.24(A)(1). 
(162)  Video Service Network means the same as video service network in ORC 1332.21l. 
(163)  Video Service Provider (or VSP) means the same as video service provider in ORC 1332.21(M). 
(164)  Wastewater means the liquid- and water-carried waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water or stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which waste is discharged or permitted to enter the wastewater treatment system. 
(165)  Wastewater system means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids, and shall be synonymous with wastewater treatment system . 
(166)  Wastewater Superintendent means the Superintendent of the Marysville Water Reclamation Facility or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
(167)  Wastewater treatment system means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids, and shall be synonymous with wastewater system . 
(168)  Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently in a definite direction. 
(169)  Water Reclamation Facility means wastewater treatment plant 
(170)  Water Superintendent means the Superintendent of the Marysville Water Treatment Plant or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
(171)  Water Treatment Plant means all facilities necessary to furnish public water service and water for consumption and fire protection. Water Treatment Plant includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Source wells, weirs, reservoirs, pumps, raw water lines, etc., necessary to provide raw water to the treatment plant. 
(b)  Water Treatment plant includes all piping, buildings, pumps and related equipment necessary to treat raw water and bring it to an approved standard for consumption. 
(c)  Distribution system includes all lines, booster pumps/station and high pressure areas, and storage devices needed to move treated water from the plant and to have available for use or consumption to a customer service line. 
(172)  Working Day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, but excluding legal holidays observed by the City. 
(173)  Zoning permit means a document issued by the Zoning Inspector authorizing the use of lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and the characteristics of the uses. 
(174)  40 CFR Part 136 means the part of the Code of Federal Regulations which prescribes the analytical methods to be used for reporting any discharge regulated directly or indirectly under an NPDES permits. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 901. - COMPREHENSIVE RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Dropping or depositing stones, mud, etc., on streets,  339.08; barricades and warning lights,  521.03. 
State Law reference- Dedication and acceptance, ORC 723.03. 

Sec. 901.01. - Rights-of-way administration. 
(A)  Administration. The Mayor shall be the principal City official responsible for the administration of Chapter 901, except as otherwise provided herein. The Mayor may delegate any or all of the duties. 
(B)  Rights-of-Way Occupancy. Each Person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use the Rights-of-Way to operate a System located in the Rights-of-Way, or who has, or seeks to have, a System located in any Rights-of-Way, shall apply for and obtain a Certificate of Registration pursuant to Chapter 901. Any Person owning, operating or maintaining a System in the Rights-of-Way without a Certificate of Registration, including Persons operating under a permit, license or franchise issued by the City prior to the effective date of Chapter 901 shall apply for and obtain a Certificate of Registration from the City, unless exempted by Section 901.01(D). Application will consist of providing the information set forth in Section 901.02 and as reasonably required by the City. 
(C)  No Construction Without a Certificate of Registration. Following the effective date of Chapter 901, no Person shall Construct or perform any work on or in, or use any System or any part thereof located on or in any Rights-of-Way without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth (4th) degree as provided for in Section 901.99. 
(D)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The following entities are not obligated to obtain a Certificate of Registration: the City and resellers of Services or Persons that do not own any System or Facilities in the Rights-of-Way. 
(2)  The following entities are required to participate in the Certificate of Registration process, but shall be exempt from the financial obligations of the Application Fee required by Section 901.02(A) and the Registration Maintenance Fee required by Section 901.05(A): Cable Operators for the purpose of providing only Cable Service and operating pursuant to a valid Cable Franchise, Video Service Provider for the purpose of providing only Video Service and operating pursuant to a valid Video Service authorization issued in accordance with ORC 1332.24, the Schools, and the County. In addition, any utility provider shall be exempt from any requirement of the Certificate of Registration process that is in direct conflict with the requirements of, and/or specifically exempted by, a valid Franchise Agreement with the City. 
(E)  Systems in Place Without a Certificate of Registration. Any System or part of a System found in the Rights-of-Way for which a Certificate of Registration has not been obtained shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the Rights-of-Way. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at Law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the Facilities and/or non-complying portion of such System; and/or prosecuting the violator. 
(F)  Future Uses. In allowing Providers and Permittees to place Facilities in the Rights-of-Way, the City shall not be liable for any damages caused thereby to any Provider's Facilities that are already in place or that shall be placed in the Rights-of-Way unless those damages arise out of the sole negligence, gross negligence, willful misconduct, or fraud of the City. No Provider is entitled to rely on the provisions of this chapter as creating a special duty to any Provider. 
(G)  Discontinuance of Operations, Abandoned and Unused Facilities. 
(1)  A Provider who has discontinued or is discontinuing its operations of any System in the City shall: 
(a)  Provide information satisfactory to the City that the Provider's obligations for its System in the Rights-of-Way under this section and any other sections in the Code have been lawfully assumed by another Applicant and/or Provider; 
(b)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its Facilities in a manner that promotes the City's goals of providing innovative and economic solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited Rights-of-Way capacity. Such proposal must be approved or denied by the City. The City's denial of a proposal to re-use its Facilities in a manner that promotes the City's goals of providing innovative and economic solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited Rights-of-Way capacity shall be done in writing and describe the City's reasons for such a denial. The denial may be appealed by the Provider to the City. The decision of the City may be appealed to the Mayor whose decision shall be final; 
(c)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of Facilities in place indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of solution. The City must approve or deny said proposal. The City's denial of a proposal to abandon facilities in place shall be done in writing and describe the City's reasons for such a denial. The decision of the City may be appealed to the Mayor whose decision shall be final; 
(d)  Completely remove all specifically identified portion(s) of its System in a manner acceptable to the City within a reasonable amount of time if the City believes that there exists a reasonable justification for such removal; 
(e)  Submit to the City within a reasonable amount of time and in accordance with ORC 4905.20 and 4905.21, a proposal for transferring ownership of its Facilities to the City. If a Provider proceeds under this clause, the City may, at its option where lawful: 
i.  Purchase the Facilities; or 
ii.  Unless a valid removal bond has already been posted pursuant to Section 901.16(B), require the Provider to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the Facilities. 
(2)  Facilities of a Provider who fail to comply with this Section and which remain Unused Facilities shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned Facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at Law or in equity, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Abating the nuisance; 
(b)  Taking possession of the Facilities and restoring them to a useable condition subject to a finding of the PUCO pursuant to the requirements of ORC 4905.20 and 4905.21; or 
(c)  Requiring removal of the Facilities by the Provider or by the Provider's surety. 
(3)  If the City requires a Provider to remove Unused Facilities in any Rights-of-Way, the City shall use reasonable efforts to direct that this removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavations of the Rights-of-Way. If the City abates the nuisance it may take all action necessary to recover its costs and to abate said nuisance, including but not limited to, those methods set forth in ORC 715.261. 
(H)  Nature of Issuance. A Certificate of Registration shall not convey equitable or legal title in the Rights-of-Way. A Certificate of Registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy Rights-of-Way in the City, for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the Certificate of Registration and in accordance with Chapter 901 of the Code. The rights to occupy the Right-of-Way may not be subdivided or subleased; provided, however, that two or more Providers may collocate Facilities in the same area of the Rights-of-Way so long as each such Provider complies with the provisions of Chapter 901. Collocating Providers may file a joint application for a Construction Permit. A Certificate of Registration does not excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before colocating its Facilities on Facilities of others, including the City's Facilities. A Certificate of Registration does not prevent a Provider from leasing space in or on the Provider's System, so long as the sharing of Facilities does not cause a violation of Law, including the provisions of Chapter 901. A Certificate of Registration does not excuse a Provider from complying with any provisions of the Code or other applicable Law. 
(I)  Other Approvals, Permits, and Agreements. In addition to a Certificate of Registration, Providers shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations, or licenses necessary for the offering or provision of such Services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities and upon the City's reasonable request, shall provide copies of such documents to the City. Further, a Certificate of Registration issued pursuant to Chapter 901 shall not entitle a Provider to use, alter, convert to, or interfere with, the Facilities, easements, poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires, fiber, cable or any other real or personal property of any kind whatsoever under the management or control of the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.02. - Certificate of registration applications. 
(A)  Certificate of Registration Applications. To obtain a Certificate of Registration to construct, own, or maintain any system within the City, or to obtain a renewal of a Certificate of Registration issued pursuant to this chapter, an Application must be filed with the City on the form adopted by the City which is hereby incorporated by reference. For all Applications the City shall collect an Application Fee. The Application Fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars and no cents ($250.00). The City shall require that the Applicant remit all Application Fee amounts invoiced within thirty (30) days of its decision to either grant or deny a Certificate of Registration. Any Applicant who fails to timely remit such invoiced Application Fee amounts shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal or equitable remedies available to the City and the immediate revocation of any Certificate of Registration having been issued. 
(B)  Information Required for Application to Obtain a Certificate of Registration. 
(1)  The Applicant shall keep all of the information required in this section current at all times, provided further that Applicant or Provider shall notify the City of any changes to the information required by this section within thirty (30) days following the date on which the Applicant or Provider has knowledge of such change. The information provided to the City at the time of Application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Each Applicant's name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers; and 
(b)  The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a System Representative. The System Representative shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the System Representative in an Emergency shall be provided at the time of Application and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the City at all times; and 
(c)  A certificate of insurance where required to be provided to meet the requirements of this Section shall: 
i.  Verify that an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Ohio has issued an insurance policy to the Applicant; 
ii.  Verify that the Applicant is insured on an occurrence basis against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the: 
a.  Use and occupancy of the Rights-of-Way by the Applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors; and 
b.  Placement and use of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way by the Applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from any and all operations, damage of Underground Facilities and collapse of property; 
iii.  Name the City, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers as an additional insured as to whom the comprehensive general liability and completed operation and products liability insurance required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
iv.  Require that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be diminished in value, canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated, until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City or her/his designee of such intent to cancel, diminish or not to renew." 
Within thirty (30) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than five (5) days prior to said cancellation, the Provider (or Applicant) shall obtain and furnish to the City a certificate of insurance evidencing replacement insurance policies. 
v.  Satisfy the requirements for comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage and umbrella coverage as follows: 
a.  Comprehensive general liability insurance: comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury, and property damage must be maintained. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following minimum limits of liability and provisions, or their equivalent: 
1.  Bodily injury: Each occurrence One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) Annual aggregate - Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
2.  Property damage: Each occurrence One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) Annual aggregate - Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
3.  Personal Injury: Annual aggregate - Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
4.  Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained for six (6) months after the termination of a Certificate of Registration. 
5.  Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for the following hazards: E explosion, C collapse, U underground. 
b.  Comprehensive auto liability insurance: Comprehensive auto liability insurance to cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles must be maintained. Applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability insurance as part of Applicant's comprehensive general liability insurance, however, said insurance is subject to approval by the City or her or his designee. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability and provisions, or their equivalent: 
1.  Bodily injury: Each occurrence One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) Annual aggregate -Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
2.  Property damage: Each occurrence One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) Annual aggregate - Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
c.  Additional insurance: The City reserves the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary after review of any proposal submitted by Applicant. 
d.  Self-insurance: Those Applicants maintaining a book value in excess of Fifty Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00) may submit a statement requesting to self-insure. If approval to self-insure is granted, Applicant shall assure the City that such self-insurance shall provide the City with no less than would have been afforded to the City by a third party insurer providing Applicant with the types and amounts of coverage detailed in this Section. This statement shall include: 
i.  Audited financial statements for the previous year; and 
ii.  A description of the Applicant's self-insurance program; and 
iii.  A listing of any and all actions against or claims made against Applicant for amounts over One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) or proof of available excess umbrella liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts above Fifty Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00). 
iv.  The City may modify or waive these requirements if they are not necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. The City may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. 
(d)  The City's examination of, or failure to request or demand, any evidence of insurance in accordance with Chapter 901 shall not constitute a waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of any insurance shall not limit Applicant's obligations under Chapter 901. 
(e)  Documentation that Applicant or Provider maintains standard workers' compensation coverage as required by Law. Similarly, Provider shall require any subcontractor to provide workers' compensation coverage in amounts required by Law for all of the subcontractor's employees. 
(f)  If the Person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent) as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state (or legal equivalent) in the state or country in which incorporated. 
(g)  A copy of the Person's certificate of authority from the PUCO and/or the FCC and/or FERC, if the Person is lawfully required to have or actually does possess such certificate from said commission(s) and any other approvals, permits, or agreements as set out in Section 901.02(I). 
(h)  Upon request of the City, a narrative (or if applicable PUCO/FCC/FERC application information) describing Applicant's proposed activities in the City including Credible information detailing Applicant's financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill Applicant's obligations under Chapter 901 and carry on Applicant's proposed activities. 
(C)  Criteria for Issuance of a Certificate of Registration. 
(1)  In deciding whether to issue a Certificate of Registration, the City shall consider: 
(a)  Whether the issuing of the Certificate of Registration will contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its citizens. 
(b)  Whether issuing of the Certificate of Registration will be consistent with Chapter 901. 
(c)  Whether Applicant has submitted a complete Application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by Law in order to Construct and operate a System in the manner proposed by the Applicant. 
(d)  Whether the Applicant is delinquent on any taxes or other obligations owed to the City, County or State of Ohio. 
(e)  Whether the Applicant has the requisite financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations under this chapter and the issuance of a Certificate of Registration. 
(f)  Any other applicable Law. 
(D)  Grant or Denial of an Application for a Certificate of Registration. 
(1)  The City, not later than sixty (60) days after the date of filing by an Applicant of a completed Application, shall grant or deny the Application. 
(2)  If an Application for a Certificate of Registration is denied, the City shall provide to the Applicant, in writing, the reasons for denying the Application and such other information as the Applicant may reasonably request to obtain consent. 
(E)  Obligations of a Provider Upon Receipt of a Certificate of Registration. In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in the Rules and Regulations each Provider shall: 
(1)  Use its Best Efforts to cooperate with other Providers and users of the Rights-of-Way and the City for the best, most efficient, and least obtrusive use of Rights-of-Way, consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic and other disruptions; 
(2)  When possible, participate in joint planning, Construction and advance notification of Rights-of-Way work, as may be required by the City; 
(3)  Upon reasonable written notice, and at the direction of the City, promptly remove or rearrange Facilities as necessary for public safety; 
(4)  Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of Facilities within the Rights-of-Way, in accordance with good engineering, construction and arboricultural practice (if applicable), including any appropriate state building codes, safety codes and Law and use Best Efforts to repair and replace any street, curb or other portion of the Rights-of-Way, or Facilities located therein, to a condition to be determined by the City to be adequate under current standards and not less than materially equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the City and other Providers, all in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, any Rules and Regulations the City may adopt and the Code; 
(5)  Construct, install, operate and maintain its Facilities and System in a manner consistent with all applicable Laws, ordinances, construction standards and governmental requirements including, but not limited to, The National Electric Safety Code, National Electric Code and applicable FCC, FERC, or other federal, state and/or local regulations; 
(6)  Be on notice that removal of trees, material pruning or the use of vegetation management programs within the Rights-of-Way of the City require prior written approval by the City or his/her designee. Any such activities, unless an Emergency, shall only be performed following the prior written approval of the City or his/her designee and must be performed in accordance with standard horticultural and arboreal practices as promulgated by entities such as the National Arbor Day Foundation, the International Society of Arboriculture, and the National Arborist Association, all as may be required by the City. Required horticultural and arboreal practices and guidelines shall be described in the Rules and Regulations adopted by pursuant to Section 901.05(E). Emergency removal of trees, material pruning or the use of vegetation management programs within the Rights-of-Way of the City may be performed in Rights-of-Way in accordance with the Rules and Regulations, but the City shall be provided notice of such Emergency work being performed within two (2) Business Days of the start of the work. In circumstances where a significant Force Majeure event in accordance with the requirements of Section 901.18(J) has occurred which prevents the Provider from being able to reasonably notify the City within two (2) Business Days, the Provider shall have up to five (5) business days from the start of the work to notify the City. Any non-Emergency tree removal, material pruning or the use of vegetation management programs within the Rights-of-Way that is performed without the City or designee's written permission shall subject a Person to the penalties of Section 901.99 and may further require that the tree or vegetation be replaced, at the sole expense of the responsible Person, with a healthy tree or vegetation of like kind and quality; 
(7)  Warrant that all worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the Provider's Facilities within the Rights-of-Way shall comply with all applicable standards of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
(8)  Use its Best Efforts to cooperate with the City in any Emergencies involving the Rights-of-Way; 
(9)  Provider shall, weather permitting, remove all graffiti within twenty-one (21) calendar days of notice. Provider shall use all reasonable efforts to remove any and all graffiti on any of the Provider's Facilities located within the City Rights-of-Way. Should the Provider fail to do so, the City may take whatever action is necessary to remove the graffiti and bill the Provider for the cost thereof; and 
(10)  Providers shall use all reasonable efforts to field identify their Facilities in the Rights-of-Way whenever Providers are notified by the City that the City has determined that such identification is reasonably necessary in order for the City to begin planning for the Construction, paving, maintenance, repairing, relocating or in any way altering any street or area in the Rights-of-Way as defined in this chapter. The City shall notify the Providers of the City's date to begin the process at least sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of said activities. In field identifying Facilities: 
(a)  Providers shall identify all Facilities that are within the affected Rights-of-Way using customary industry standards and distinct identification; 
(b)  Facilities will be so marked as to identify the Provider responsible for said Facilities; 
(c)  Should any such marking interfere with the Facilities function, create a safety problem or violate any safety code, alternative methods of marking the Facilities may be approved by the City; and 
(d)  All marking should be clearly readable from the ground and include the product name or logo only. No advertising will be permitted. 
(11)  A Provider that is replacing an existing utility pole shall be responsible to coordinate with all other Providers to ensure the orderly transfer of all lines or cables to the replacement utility pole, the removal of the existing utility pole, and the restoration of the Rights-of-Way within ninety (90) days after the replacement utility pole is installed. Upon request, the City may grant the Provider additional time for good cause. 
(F)  Establishment of Utility Corridors. 
(1)  The City may assign specific corridors within the Rights-of-Way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of Facilities that are, or that the City expects, may someday be, located within the Rights-of-Way. 
(2)  Any Provider whose Facilities are in the Rights-of-Way and are in a position at variance with Utility Corridors established by the City shall at the time of the next Construction of the area, excluding normal maintenance activities, move such Facilities to their assigned position within the Rights-of-Way. Existing underground Facilities located within a designated Utility Corridor shall not be required to relocate into adjacent or alternative portions of the Rights-of-Way unless they are in conflict with an actual or proposed public improvement project. The above requirements may be waived by the City for good cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of such factors as: the remaining economic life of the Facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the Provider. If a Provider is denied a requested waiver from the above requirements, the Provider may appeal the denial of the City to the Mayor. 
(3)  The City shall make every good faith attempt to accommodate all existing and potential users of the Rights-of-Way as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Providers may enter into written agreements to use existing poles and conduits with the owners of same and shall use Best Efforts to install their Facilities within the Rights-of-Way. 
(5)  No Facility placed in any Rights-of-Way shall be placed in such a manner that interferes with normal travel on such Rights-of-Way. 
(6)  Unless otherwise stated in a Certificate of Registration or Permit, all Facilities within the Rights-of-Way shall be Constructed and located in accordance with the Code and with the following provision: 
(a)  Whenever all existing Facilities that have been traditionally located overhead are located underground in a certain area within the City, a Provider who desires to place its Facilities in the same area must also locate its Facilities underground. 
(b)  Whenever a Provider is required to locate or re-locate Facilities underground within a certain area of the City, every Provider with Facilities within the same area of the City shall concurrently re-locate their Facilities underground. 
(c)  The above requirements may be waived by the City for good cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of such factors as: the remaining economic life of the Facilities, public safety, customer service needs, Law precluding such undergrounding of Facilities; and hardship to the Provider. If a Provider is denied a requested waiver from the above requirements, the Provider may appeal the denial of the City to the Mayor. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.03. - Reporting requirements. 
(A)  Construction and Major Maintenance Plan. Each Provider shall, at the time of initial Application and by January 1 of each following year, file a Construction and Major Maintenance Plan with the City. Such Construction and Major Maintenance Plan shall be provided for all geographical areas requested by the City, up to and including the entire geographical area of the City. It shall be submitted using a format(s) mutually agreeable to the Provider and the City and shall contain the information determined by the City to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of Construction in the Rights-of-Way. The Construction and Major Maintenance Plan shall include, but not be limited to, all currently scheduled and/or anticipated Construction projects for the next calendar year, if none are scheduled or anticipated then the Plan shall so state. The Provider shall use its Best Efforts in supplying this information and shall update the Construction and Major Maintenance Plan on file with the City whenever there is a material change in scheduled and/or anticipated Construction projects. In an effort to assist Providers with the completion of their annual Construction and Major Maintenance Plan, the City, on or before November 1st of each year, will send each Provider's System Representative a descriptive narrative (and any mapping information reasonably available) for all the planned Right-of-Way improvements and/or scheduled maintenance that the City then currently intends to undertake during the next calendar year. 
(B)  Mapping Data. With the filing of its Application for a Certificate of Registration, a Provider shall be required to accurately inform the City of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of Right-of-Way the Provider's System then currently occupies and begin submitting to the City all information that currently exists and which can be provided regarding the location of its Facilities in the Right-of-Way in hard copy or in the most advanced format (including, but not limited to, electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the Provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the City. Unless otherwise required by Section 901.13(B), a Provider shall have up to one (1) year from the date of the Provider's initial filing of an Application for a Certificate of Registration to completely submit all the mapping data for a Provider's System in the entire geographical area of the City which it owns or over which it has control that are located in any Rights-of-Way of the City in the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the Provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the City. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the City to reasonably determine the location of the Provider's facilities in the Rights-of-Way. The Provider shall supply the mapping data on paper if the City determines that the format currently being used by the Provider is not capable of being read by the City. Any time after the issuance of a Certificate of Registration, and upon the reasonable request of the City, a Provider shall be required to provide to the City any additional location information for any Facilities which it owns or over which it has control that are located in any Rights-of-Way of the City required by the City. Any and all actual direct, incidental and indirect costs incurred by the City during the process of reviewing, inputting and/or converting a Provider's mapping information to comport with the City's then current standard format (whether electronic or otherwise) shall be directly billed to, and must be timely remitted by, the Provider. Failure to pay such mapping costs within sixty (60) days of receipt of an invoice shall subject an Applicant or Provider to revocation of its Certificate of Registration and the penalties of Section 901.99. Further, each Provider that has been issued a Certificate of Registration shall accurately inform the City on or before each subsequent January 1st of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of Right-of-Way the Provider's System then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1st. The City may, in the future, adopt additional specifications and further define or modify the mapping data requirements under this section for reasons including, but not limited to, changes in technology or the Law regarding public disclosure of a Provider's mapping information. When the City modifies and/or amends the mapping data requirements, the City shall use Best Efforts to avoid unreasonably increasing the burden to the Providers that may be associated with satisfying the amended mapping requirements. When the mapping requirements of Section 901.04(B) are amended, each Provider shall be served with a copy of the new specifications or modifications by regular U.S. Mail to the System Representative identified in each Certificate of Registration and in accordance with Section 901.19(C); provided, however, that any failure of any Provider to actually receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or enforceability of said specifications or modifications. 
(C)  Exemption from Disclosure. A Provider shall notify the City if the Provider believes that any specific document or portion of a document being submitted to the City is exempt from the public records disclosure requirements of ORC 149.43. The notification shall be in writing and indicate the specific document or portion of a document that the Provider believes is exempt from disclosure. The notification shall include the legal basis for the claimed exemption, including the applicable statutory reference and any additional information necessary to make a determination of exemption for each specific document or portion of a document. If a public records request is made for documents submitted by a Provider, the City will consider the written notification in making its own independent determination of whether a specific document or a portion of a document is exempt from the disclosure requirements of ORC 149.43. To the extent permitted by law, the City will endeavor to use reasonable Best Efforts to notify the Provider of the request prior to making the document available for inspection or copying. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.04. - Compensation for certificate of registration. 
(A)  Compensation. As compensation for the City's costs to administer Chapter 901, manage, administer and control the Rights-of-Way and maintain each Certificate of Registration issued, every Provider or any Person operating a System shall pay to the City Registration Maintenance Fees beginning January 1, 2013. The Registration Maintenance Fee shall be determined and assessed to Providers and other Persons operating a System or otherwise using and occupying the Rights-of-Way in accordance with the following process and formula: 
(1)  Providers and Applicants, as required in Section 901.04(B), shall accurately inform the City upon application for a Certificate of Registration and on or before each subsequent January 1st of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of Right-of-Way the Provider's System then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1. 
(2)  Any Provider who occupies less than five (5) linear miles of Rights-of-Way in the City shall be assessed an annual Registration Maintenance Fee of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars and No Cents ($250.00). 
(3)  Any Provider who occupies five (5) linear miles or more of Rights-of-Way in the City shall be assessed an annual Registration Maintenance Fee of Five Hundred Dollars and No Cents ($500.00). 
(4)  The City shall perform its annual calculation of Registration Maintenance Fees following receipt of the Providers required January 1 mileage report. Registration Maintenance Fees shall be invoiced to Providers on or about February 1 of each calendar year and shall be due thirty (30) days following receipt. 
(5)  Cable companies operating under non-exclusive Cable Franchises for the purposes of providing Cable Service, Video Services Provider operating under a VSA for the purpose of providing video services, and providers of Open Video System services, which compensate the City under other mechanisms in an amount equal to or greater than the annual Registration Maintenance Fee that would normally be required for their Right-of-Way use in the City shall not be required to contribute to the recovery of Rights-of-Way Costs as defined by Chapter 901 with the exception of Permit Costs. 
(B)  Timing. Registration Maintenance Fees shall be paid in full for the first year of the registration as a condition of the Certificate of Registration becoming effective. Fees may be prorated from the effective date of the Certificate of Registration to the end of the calendar year if less than one (1) full year. 
(C)  Taxes and Assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities on the use of City property as a result of a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the Provider shall be responsible for payment of such taxes. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to Chapter 901 and shall not be considered an offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and charges listed in Chapter 901. The Registration Maintenance Fee is not in lieu of any tax, fee, or other assessment except as specifically provided in Chapter 901, or as required by applicable Law. 
(D)  Interest on Late Payments. In the event that any Registration Maintenance Fee is not paid to the City by the date due, the Provider shall pay a monthly late charge of one percent (1%) of the unpaid balance for each month or any portion thereof for which payment is not made. 
(E)  No Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance by the City of any Registration Maintenance Fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such Registration Maintenance Fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable. 
(F)  Cost of Publication. A Provider shall assume all actual and direct newspaper or other appropriate publication costs of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) associated with its Certificate of Registration that may be required by Law or that may otherwise be required by its Application for a Certificate of Registration or other Permit as provided for herein. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.05. - Oversight and regulation. 
(A)  Reports. Upon reasonable request of the City, a Provider shall provide the City with a list of any and all material communications, public reports, petitions, or other filings, either received from or submitted to any municipal, county, state or federal agency or official (and any response thereto submitted by or received by a Provider), and any other information or report reasonably related to a Provider's obligations under Chapter 901 which in any way materially effects the operation of the System or a Provider's representations and warranties set forth herein, but not including tax returns or other filings which are confidential. Upon request, a Provider shall promptly, but in no case later than thirty (30) business days following the request, deliver to the City a complete copy of any item on said list. Upon the request of the City, a Provider shall promptly submit to the City any information or report reasonably related to a Provider's obligations under Chapter 901, its business and operations with respect to the System or its operation, in such form and containing such information as the City shall specify. Such information or report shall be accurate and complete and supplied within thirty (30) days. 
(B)  Confidentiality. All information submitted to the City that is considered Confidential Information, trade secret and/or proprietary information or information that upon public its disclosure would be highly likely to place critical portions of the Provider's System in real danger of vandalism, sabotage or an act of terrorism, must be clearly marked as such when submitted. The City shall exercise all reasonable legal protections so as not to publicly disclose to any third party such information unless required by Law. The City shall, following receipt of a request for public disclosure of clearly marked trade secret and/or proprietary information submitted by a Provider, endeavor to use reasonable Best Efforts to timely place the Provider's System Representative on notice that such a request for public disclosure has been made. 
(C)  Provider's Expense. All reports and records required under Chapter 901 shall be furnished at the sole expense of a Provider. 
(D)  Right of Inspection and Audit. The City's designated representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to a Provider under the circumstances; documents, records, or other information which pertain to a Provider's operation of a System within the City that are related to its obligations under Chapter 901. All such documents shall be made available within the City or in such other place that the City may agree upon in writing in order to facilitate said inspection, examination, or audit. 
(E)  Rules and Regulations. The City may propose and adopt (and from time to time amend) the Rules and Regulations regarding Chapter 901, Construction standards and occupancy requirements of the Right-of-Way. Prior to the adoption or amendment of the Rules and Regulations, the City shall provide written notice and a copy of the proposed language of such adoption or amendment, via United States Regular Mail, to each Provider who holds a then current Certificate of Registration. Each Provider shall then have thirty (30) days following the date of the City's mailing to provide written comment regarding the proposed language to the City. At least forty-five (45) days, but not more than sixty (60) days following the date of the City's mailing, the City shall schedule and hold a meeting, to make available a forum at which all then current Providers may address any questions, concerns and make reasonable suggestions regarding the proposed new Rules and Regulations to the City. The City shall, following said meeting and the review of the Providers' comments and suggestions, adopt or amend the Rules and Regulations in a manner that best serves the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.06. - Registration term. 
The term of each Certificate of Registration granted under Chapter 901 shall be valid from the date of issuance until such time as it is revoked, terminated, has lapsed or is properly amended. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.07. - Indemnity. 
(A)  Indemnity Required. Each Certificate of Registration issued pursuant to Chapter 901 shall contain provisions whereby Providers agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees, volunteers, and subcontractors harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses: 
(1)  for the repair, replacement, or restoration of City property, equipment, materials, structures and Facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of such Provider's acts or omissions; and 
(2)  from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments: 
(a)  For damage to or loss of the property of any Person, and/or the death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's compensation, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any Person; 
(b)  Arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act or omissions of such Provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to such Certificate of Registration, no matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur. 
(3)  In any event, all Persons using or occupying the Rights-of-Way agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City as set forth above as a condition of their use and occupancy of the Rights-of-Way. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.08. - Civil forfeitures. 
In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter 901 and the remedy of specific performance, which may be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction, the City may assess an additional penalty of civil forfeiture for failure to comply with any provision of Chapter 901. Such penalty shall be a monetary sum, payable to the City, in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per twenty-four (24) hour day of violation and any subsequent portion of a day less than twenty-four (24) hours in length. Prior to assessing said penalty, the City will provide written notice to the Provider detailing the failure to comply with a specific provision of Chapter 901. 
Such notice shall also indicate that said penalty shall be assessed in fifteen (15) calendar days subsequent to the date of receipt if compliance is not achieved. If a Provider desires to challenge such penalty, Provider must request a public hearing before the Mayor within ten (10) days of service of the notice. Such public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the Provider's request. If Provider requests such hearing before the Mayor, such penalty shall be temporarily suspended. However, if, after the public hearing, the Mayor determines that Provider failed to comply with the specific provision(s) of Chapter 901 referenced in the notice, such penalty shall be assessed starting with the fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice referenced in this section and continuing each day thereafter until compliance is achieved. The determination of the Mayor shall be final. The Provider may file an administrative appeal pursuant to ORC Chapter 2506. The penalty shall continue to accrue during the appeal unless the Provider obtains a stay and posts a supersede as bond pursuant to ORC 2505.09 or the Provider comes into full compliance with Chapter 901. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.09. - Termination of certificate of registration. 
(A)  Default Notice Provided. The City through its City shall give written notice of default to a Provider if the City, in its sole discretion, determines that a Provider has: 
(1)  Violated any material provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a Certificate of Registration or any Law and failed to cure as may be required; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision of the issuance of a Certificate of Registration or the acceptance of it; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon City; 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in the Application for a Certificate of Registration. 
(B)  Cure Required. If a Provider fails to cure a default within thirty (30) calendar days after such notice is served by the City then such default shall be a material default and City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at Law or in equity to terminate the Certificate of Registration. If the City decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a Provider with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a Provider a minimum of ten (10) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the Provider fails to cure within ten (10) calendar days, the City may declare the Certificate of Registration terminated. 
(3)  The Provider shall have ten (10) calendar days to appeal the termination to the Mayor. All such appeals shall be in writing. If the Mayor determines there was not a breach, then the Mayor shall overturn the decision of the City. Otherwise, the Mayor shall affirm the decision of the City to terminate. The determination of the Mayor shall be final. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.10. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(A)  No Use Without Authorization. No Person shall use the Rights-of-Way to operate a System that has not been authorized by the City in accordance with the terms of Chapter 901 and been issued a Certificate of Registration. 
(B)  No Use Without Certificate of Registration. No Person shall place or have placed any Facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the Rights-of-Way, unless allowed under Chapter 901 or having been issued a Certificate of Registration. 
(C)  Unauthorized Use a Violation. Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of Chapter 901 continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(D)  Distinct and Separate Offense. No Person shall fail to comply with the provisions of Chapter 901. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of Chapter 901 continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(E)  Penalty Assessed. The violation of any provision of Chapter 901 shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of Chapter 901 shall be as provided in Section 901.99. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.11. - Assignment or transfer of ownership and renewal. 
(A)  Assignment or Transfer Approval Required. A Certificate of Registration shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, other than to an Affiliate, without the prior written consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any assignment or transfer of Certificate of Registration, including an assignment or transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change, requires the written approval of the City. 
(B)  Procedure to Request Assignment or Transfer Approval. The parties to the assignment or transfer of Certificate of Registration shall make a written request to the City for its consent in the form of the Certificate of Registration Application. The City shall reply in writing within sixty (60) days of actual receipt of the request and shall indicate its approval of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary. City may conduct a public hearing on the request within thirty (30) days of such determination if it determines that a sale or transfer of the Certificate of Registration adversely affects the City. 
(C)  Notice and Hearing. Notice of a hearing shall be given fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by City. 
(D)  Review by City. The City will review the qualifications (including, but not limited to legal, technical and financial where appropriate) of the proposed assignee or transferee and terms of the existing Certificate of Registration. City will make its decision in writing setting forth any conditions for assignment or transfer. Within one hundred and twenty (120) days of actual receipt of the request for assignment or transfer, the City shall approve or deny such assignment or transfer request in writing. 
(E)  Fundamental Corporate Change. For purposes of this section, fundamental corporate change means the sale or transfer of a controlling interest in the stock of a corporation or the sale or transfer of all or a majority of a corporation's assets, merger (including a parent and its subsidiary corporation), consolidation or creation of a subsidiary corporation. For the purposes of this section, fundamental partnership change means the sale or transfer of all or a majority of a partnership's assets, change of a general partner in a limited partnership, change from a limited to a general partnership, incorporation of a partnership, or change in the control of a partnership. 
(F)  Certificate of Registration and Assignee/Transferee Replacement Issuance Required. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be ultimately acceptable to the City without transferee or assignee requesting and being issued a replacement Certificate of Registration within ninety (90) days of transfer or assignment. 
(G)  Not a Transfer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such consent or approval shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any Person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control of the original holder of the Certificate of Registration. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.12. - Construction permits. 
(A)  Construction Permit Requirement. Except as otherwise provided in the Code, no Person may Construct in any Rights-of-Way without first having obtained a Construction Permit as set forth below. This requirement shall be in addition to any requirements set forth in the Code. 
(1)  A Construction Permit allows the Permittee to Construct in that part of the Rights-of-Way described in such Construction Permit and to obstruct travel over the specified portion of the Rights-of-Way by placing Facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(2)  A Construction Permit is valid only for the dates and the area of Rights-of-Way specified in the Construction Permit itself and shall in no event be valid for than 180 days from the construction start date. 
(3)  No Permittee may Construct in the Rights-of-Way beyond the date or dates specified in the Construction Permit unless such Permittee: 
(a)  Submits a Supplementary Application for another Construction Permit before the expiration of the initial Construction Permit; and 
(b)  Is granted a new Construction Permit or Construction Permit Extension. 
(4)  Original Construction Permits issued pursuant to Section 901.12 shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by Inspectors and authorized City personnel. If the original Construction Permit involves work conducted simultaneously at multiple locations, each location shall display a photocopy of the original Construction Permit. If the original Construction Permit is not conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site, then upon request, the original Construction Permit must be produced within twelve (12) hours or the first earliest Business Hour, whichever is later. For purposes of this Section, Business Hour shall mean the hours between 8 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during a Business Day. 
(B)  Construction Permit Applications. 
(1)  Application for a Construction Permit, unless an Emergency shall be made to the City no less than five (5) Business Days prior to the requested start of Construction. 
(2)  All Construction Permit Applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(a)  Credible evidence that the Applicant (where required) has been issued a Certificate of Registration or proof that the Applicant has written authority to apply for a Construction Permit on behalf of a party that has been issued a Certificate of Registration; 
(b)  Submission of a completed Construction Permit Application in the form required by the City, including, but not limited to, all required attachments, and scaled, dated drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project, number and location of street crossings, and the location of all then known existing and proposed Facilities of the Applicant or Provider within the proposed project area. All drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the Application shall comply with applicable technical codes, Rules and Regulations and be certified as to being in such compliance by trained technical personnel acceptable to the City. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the City to reasonably determine the location of the Provider's facilities in the Rights-of-Way. The City reserves the right, in circumstances that the City considers unique, complex or unusual, to request that certain submitted drawings, plans and specifications be accompanied by the certification of a registered licensed professional engineer; 
(c)  A City approved traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the OMUTCD, to prevent injury or damage to Persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(d)  If the Applicant wants to install new Facilities, evidence that there is no surplus space and evidence that the Applicant has received an appropriate Permit and is adhering to the City's Rules and Regulations; 
(e)  If Applicant is proposing an above ground installation on existing poles within the Rights-of-Way, the applicant shall provide Credible information satisfactory to the City to sufficiently detail and identify: 
i.  The size and height of the existing poles; and 
ii.  Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the excess capacity currently available on such poles before installation of Applicant's Facilities; and 
iii.  Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the excess capacity for like or similar Facilities that will exist on such poles after installation of Applicant's Facilities; and 
(f)  If the Applicant proposes to install new poles within the Rights-of-Way, the Applicant shall provide: 
i.  Credible evidence satisfactory to the City that there is no excess capacity on existing poles or in existing underground systems; 
ii.  Credible evidence to the City that it is not financially and/or technically practicable for the Applicant to make an underground installation or locate its facilities on existing poles; 
iii.  The location, size, height, color, and material of the proposed poles; and 
iv.  Credible evidence satisfactory to the City that the Applicant will adhere to all the applicable Laws concerning the installation of new poles. 
(g)  If Applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the Rights-of-Way, the Applicant shall provide Credible information satisfactory to the City to sufficiently detail and identify: 
i.  Based on the existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or similar facilities currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of Applicant's Facilities; and 
ii.  Based on existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or similar facilities that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of Applicant's Facilities. 
(h)  If Applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the Rights-of-Way, the Applicant must provide Credible information satisfactory to the City to sufficiently detail and identify: 
i.  The location, depth, size, and quantity of proposed new ducts or conduits; and 
ii.  The excess capacity for like or similar equipment that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of Applicant's Facilities. 
(i)  A preliminary Construction schedule and completion date; and 
(j)  Payment of all money then due to the City for: 
i.  Permit Fees; 
ii.  Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City as a result of Applicant's prior Construction in the Rights-of-Way or any Emergency actions taken by the City. 
iii.  Any Certificate of Registration issued to the Applicant/Person whose Facilities are being Constructed. 
iv.  Any other money due to the City from the Applicant/Person whose Facilities are being Constructed. 
(k)  When a Construction Permit is requested for purposes of installing additional Systems or any part of a System, the posting of a Construction Bond and Removal Bond, acceptable to the City and subject to Chapter 901, for the additional Systems or any part of a System is required. 
(l)  Upon request, the City may modify or waive the information requirements if they are not necessary in evaluating the Construction Permit application. The City may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in evaluating the Construction Permit application. 
(C)  Issuance of Permit; Conditions. 
(1)  If the City determines that the Applicant has satisfied the requirements of Chapter 901 and the Construction Permit process, the City shall issue a Construction Permit subject to the provisions of Section 901.12(C)(2). 
(2)  The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the Construction Permit and the performance of the Permittee thereunder in order to protect the City's investment in the Right-of-Way, protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the Rights-of-Way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the Rights-of-Way, or to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(D)  Construction Permit Fees. 
(1)  The City shall collect a Construction Permit Fee equal to the actual and direct cost incurred by the City that is associated with receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) the Construction Permit and any oversight of the Construction Permit or the Construction work associated therewith. Following completion of the Construction work for which a Construction Permit has been granted (or at the time of the denial of Construction Permit) the City shall calculate and assess all actual and direct costs involved in receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) the Construction Permit and any oversight of the Construction Permit or Construction Work associated therewith and provide a written invoice to the Applicant for the appropriate amount. The City shall require that the Applicant remit all Construction Permit Fee amounts invoiced within thirty (30) days. Any Applicant who fails to timely remit such invoiced Construction Permit Fee amounts shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal or equitable remedies available to the City and the immediate revocation of any Certificate of Registration or Construction Permit having been issued. 
(2)  The City may in addition to these direct and actual costs listed in subsection (D)(1) may include in the Construction Permit Fee the cost of the value of degradation and reduction in the useful life of the Rights-of-Way that will result from Construction that has taken place therein. Degradation and the reduction in the useful life , for the purpose of this Section, means the accelerated depreciation of the Rights-of-Way caused by Construction in or disturbance of the Rights-of-Way, resulting in the need to reconstruct or repair such Rights-of-Way earlier than would be required if the Construction did not occur. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(4), no future Construction Permits shall be issued to an Applicant without payment of all outstanding Construction Permit Fees within thirty (30) days of original invoice. The City shall be exempt from payment of Construction Permit Fees. Construction Permit Fees that were paid for a Permit that the City has revoked due to breach and in accordance with the terms of Section 901.09 or Section 901.15(E) are not refundable. 
(4)  The City may permit a Provider to make quarterly payments of Construction Permit Fees based upon the Provider's financial condition and past payment history. The quarterly payment shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the end of the quarter. The City may revoke this permission due to a change in financial condition, late payment, or other just cause. 
(E)  Joint Applications. Applicants are encouraged to submit joint Applications for Construction Permits to work in the Rights-of-Way at the same place and time. Joint Applicants shall have the ability to divide amongst themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable Construction Permit Fees. 
(F)  Exceptions to Permit Requirements. 
(1)  The following shall be excluded from the requirements of Section 901.12: 
(a)  The repairing or improvement of streets or other public places under or by virtue of a contract with the City. 
(b)  The maintenance, planting or removal of trees and shrubs from within the Right-of-Way. 
(c)  The addition of an overhead customer service line for any Utility, which service line does not cross across the edge of pavement limits or extend over pavement at a height of less than fifteen (15) feet above the pavement. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.13. - Construction, relocation and restoration. 
(A)  Utility Engineering Study Required. 
(1)  Prior to commencement of any initial Construction, extension, or relocation of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way, except for repair, maintenance or replacement with like Facilities or relocations requested or caused by a third party (excluding the City) or another Permittee, a Permittee shall conduct a utility engineering study on the proposed route of Construction expansion or relocation if requested by the City. Where such Construction and/or relocation is requested or caused by a third party, every Permittee located within the Rights-of-Way at issue or involved with the work shall use all Best Efforts to cooperate and assist any other Permittee or person who is directed by the City to perform the required utility engineering study. A utility engineering study consists of, at minimum, completion of the following tasks: 
(a)  Secure all available "as-built" plans, plats and other location data indicating the existence and approximate location of all Facilities along the proposed Construction route. 
(b)  Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any Facilities along the proposed Construction route, including, but not limited to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs. 
(c)  Determine and record the presence and precise location of all Underground Facilities the Applicant or Person on whose behalf the Permit was applied for owns or controls in the Rights-of-Way along the proposed System route. Upon request of the City, a Permittee shall also record and identify the general location of all other Facilities in the Rights-of-Way along the proposed System route. For the purposes of this Section, general location shall mean the alignment of other Facilities in the Rights-of-Way, but shall not necessarily mean the depth of other Facilities in the Rights-of-Way. 
(d)  Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the tasks described in Section 901.13(A)(1)(a)-(c) on the Construction Permittee's proposed System route maps and Construction plans. 
(e)  Where the proposed location of Facilities and the location of existing Underground Facilities appear to conflict on the plans drafted in accordance with Section 901.13(A)(1)(d), Permittee has the option of either utilizing non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at the critical points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the horizontal, vertical and spatial position, composition, size and other specifications of the conflicting Underground Facilities, or re-designing the Construction plans to eliminate the apparent conflict. Unless waived by the City, a Permittee shall not excavate more than a three (3) feet by three (3) feet square hole in the Rights-of-Way to complete this task. 
(f)  Based on all of the data collected upon completion of the tasks described in this section, adjust the proposed System design to avoid the need to relocate other Underground Facilities. 
(2)  The City may modify the scope of the utility engineering study as necessary depending on the proposed Construction plans. 
(B)  Copy to City. Upon completion of the tasks described in Section 901.13(A), the Construction Permittee shall submit the proposed System route maps and Construction Plans, with the results of the utility engineering study, in the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the Provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the City. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the City to reasonably determine the location of the Provider's facilities in the Rights-of-Way. The Provider shall supply the mapping data on paper if the City determines that the format currently being used by the Provider is not capable of being read by the City. 
(C)  Qualified Firm. All utility engineering studies conducted pursuant to this section shall be performed by the Permittee if in the discretion of the City the Construction Permittee is qualified to complete the project itself, alternatively utility engineering studies shall be performed by a firm specializing in utility engineering that is approved by the City. 
(D)  Cost of Study. The Permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with Sections 901.13(A)-(C). 
(E)  Construction Schedule. Unless otherwise provided for in Chapter 901 or in the Rules and Regulations, or unless the City waives any of the requirements of this Section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a Permittee shall be required to submit a written Construction schedule to the City five (5) Working Days before commencing any work in or about the Rights-of-Way, and shall further notify the City not less than one (1) Working Day in advance of any excavation in the Rights-of-Way. This Section shall apply to all situations with the exception of circumstances under Section 901.15(D)(1) (Emergency Situations) and Section 901.14 (Minor Maintenance). 
(F)  Location of Facilities. 
(1)  The placement of new Facilities and replacement of old Facilities, either above ground or underground, shall be completed in conformity with applicable Laws and the City's Rules and Regulations. 
(2)  The City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional Facilities within the Rights-of-Way if the Right-of-Way is Full. In making such decisions, the City shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the Rights-of-Way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public health, safety and welfare, the condition of the Rights-of-Way, the time of year with respect to essential Utilities, the protection of existing Facilities in the Rights-of-Way, future City and County plans for public improvements, development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest and nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral treatment among Providers. 
(G)  Least Disruptive Technology. All Construction or maintenance of Facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least amount of damage and disruption of the Rights-of-Way. Specifically, every Permittee when performing underground Construction, if technically and/or technologically feasible and not economically unreasonable, shall utilize Trenchless Technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling, directional boring, and microtunneling. In addition, all cable, wire or fiber optic cable installed in the subsurface Rights-of-Way pursuant to Chapter 901 may be required to be installed in conduit, and if so required, no cable, wire or fiber optic cable may be installed pursuant to Chapter 901 using "direct bury" techniques. 
(H)  Special Exceptions. The City may grant a special exception to the requirements of Sections 901.13(F) and 901.13(G) if a Permittee, upon application, demonstrates with written evidence that: 
(1)  The exception will not create any threat to the City's investment or in the Rights-of-Way, the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Permittee demonstrates that the increased economic burden and the potential adverse impact on the Permittee's Construction schedule resulting from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively inhibits the ability of the Permittee to provide Services in the City. 
(3)  The Permittee demonstrates that the requirement unreasonably discriminates against the Permittee in favor of another Person. 
(4)  The requirements requested by the City herein create an unreasonable economic burden for the Permittee that outweighs any potential benefit to the City. 
(I)  Relocation of Facilities. 
(1)  A Provider shall as promptly as reasonably possible and at its own expense, permanently remove and relocate its Facilities in the Rights-of-Way whenever the City finds it necessary to request such removal and relocation. In instances where the City requests removal and/or relocation, the City shall waive all applicable Construction Permit Fees. Upon removal and/or relocation, the Provider shall restore the Rights-of-Way to the same or better condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. If existing poles are required to be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles will be replaced with poles of the same or similar size. In accordance with Law, the City may request relocation and/or removal in order to prevent unreasonable interference by the Provider's Facilities with: 
(a)  A public improvement undertaken or approved by the City. 
(b)  The City's investment in the Right-of-Way. 
(c)  When the public health, safety, and welfare requires it, or when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the Rights-of-Way. 
(d)  The sale, conveyance, vacation, or narrowing of all or any part of a Right-of-Way. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Provider who has Facilities in the Right-of-Way subject to a vacation or narrowing that is not required for the purposes of the City, shall have a permanent easement in such a vacated portion or excess portion in conformity with ORC 723.041. 
(3)  If, in the reasonable judgment of the City, a Provider fails to commence removal and/or relocation of its Facilities as designated by the City, within thirty (30) days after the City's removal order, or if a Provider fails to substantially complete such removal, including all associated repair of the Rights-of-Way of the City, within twelve (12) months thereafter, then, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable Law, the City shall have the right to: 
(a)  Declare that all rights, title and interest to the Facilities belong to the City with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to, the right to connect and use the Facilities or to effect a transfer of all right, title and interest in the Facilities to another Person for operation; or 
(b)  Authorize removal of the Facilities installed by the Provider in, on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City at Provider's cost and expense, by another Person; however, the City shall have no liability for any damage caused by such action and the Provider shall be liable to the City for all reasonable costs incurred by the City in such action; and 
(c)  To the extent consistent with applicable Law, any portion of the Provider's Facilities in, on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City designated by the City for removal and not timely removed by the Provider shall belong to and become the property of the City without payment to the Provider, and the Provider shall execute and deliver such documents, as the City shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the City, to evidence such ownership by the City. 
(J)  Pre-Excavation Facilities Location. 
(1)  Before the start date of any Rights-of-Way excavation, each Provider who has Facilities located in the area to be excavated shall, to the best of its ability, mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all its Facilities. 
(2)  All Providers shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to establish the exact location of its Facilities and the best procedure for excavation. 
(K)  Rights-of-Way Restoration. 
(1)  The work to be done under the Permit, and the Restoration of the Rights-of-Way as required herein, weather permitting, must be completed within the dates specified in the Permit. In addition to its own work, the Permittee must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including trench backfill, paving and its foundations in accordance with the Code and Rules and Regulations. If a Permittee is unable to timely complete the restoration of Rights-of-Way due to unreasonable inclement weather conditions, the Permittee shall complete the restoration of the Rights-of-Way as soon as weather conditions make it possible to do so and upon said completion notify the City. 
(2)  In approving an Application for a Construction Permit, the City may choose either to have the Permittee restore the Rights-of-Way or alternatively to restore the Rights-of-Way itself if the Permittee has in the past not abided by requirements of Chapter 901. 
(3)  If the City chooses to allow Permittee to restore the Rights-of-Way, the Permittee shall at the time of Application for a Construction Permit post a Construction Bond in an amount determined by the City to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the Rights-of-Way to its approximate pre-excavation condition. If, twelve (12) months after completion of the Restoration of the Rights-of-Way, the City determines that the Rights-of-Way have been properly restored, the surety on the Construction Bond shall be released. 
(4)  The Permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and with the materials specified by the City. The City shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the Restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The City in exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards and considerations: the number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage to the Rights-of-Way; the traffic volume carried by the Rights-of-Way; the character of the neighborhood surrounding the Rights-of-Way; the pre-excavation condition of the Rights-of-Way; the remaining life-expectancy of the Rights-of-Way affected by the excavation; whether the relative cost of the method of Restoration to the Permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the Rights-of-Way that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the Rights-of-Way; and the likelihood that the particular method of Restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the Rights-of-Way that would otherwise take place. Methods of Restoration may include, but are not limited to, patching the affected area, replacement of the Rights-of-Way base at the affected area, and in the most severe cases; milling, overlay and/or street reconstruction of the entire area of the Rights-of-Way affected by the work. 
(5)  By restoring the Rights-of-Way itself, the Permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for twelve (12) months following its completion. During this twelve (12) month period, it shall, upon notification from the City, correct all Restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the City. Weather permitting, said work shall be completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, unless otherwise extended by the City. 
(6)  If the Permittee fails to restore the Rights-of-Way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the City, the City, at its option, may do such work. In that event, the Permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the Restoration cost of restoring the Rights-of-Way and any other costs incurred by the City. Upon failure to pay, the City may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted by Permittee and/or pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies. 
(7)  If the work to be done under the Permit is being done at the same location and the same period of time as work by the City and/ or another Permitee(s), then the City may reasonably apportion the Restoration responsibility among the City, Providers and/or other Persons. 
(L)  Damage to Other Facilities. 
(1)  In the case of an Emergency, and if possible after reasonable efforts to contact the Provider seeking a timely response, when the City performs work in the Rights-of-Way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a Provider's Facilities to protect those Facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that Provider and shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Upon failure to pay, the City may pursue all legal and equitable remedies in the event a Provider does not pay or the City may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted by the Permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies. Each Provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the Facilities of another Provider caused during the City's response to an Emergency occasioned by that Provider's Facilities. 
(2)  Each Provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any City-owned Facilities in the Rights-of-Way which the Provider or its Facilities damage. 
(M)  Rights-of-Way Vacation. 
(1)  If the City sells or otherwise transfers a Rights-of-Way which contains the Facilities of a Provider, such sale or transfer shall be subject to any existing easements of record and any easements required pursuant to ORC 723.041. 
(N)  Installation Requirements. The excavation, backfilling, Restoration, and all other work performed in the Rights-of-Way shall be performed in conformance with all applicable Laws, Rules and Regulations, other standards as may be promulgated by the City. 
(O)  Inspection. When the Construction under any Permit hereunder is completed, the Permittee shall notify the City. 
(1)  The Permittee shall make the Construction site available to the Inspector and to all others as authorized by Law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the Construction. 
(2)  At the time of inspection, the Inspector may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public, violates any law or which violates the term and conditions of the Permit and/or Chapter 901. The City may inspect the work, however; the failure of the City to inspect the work does not alleviate the responsibility of the Permittee to complete the work in accordance with the approved Permit and the requirements of Chapter 901. 
(3)  The Inspector may issue an order to the Permittee for any work which does not conform to the Permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the Permit. The order may be served on the Permittee as provided in Section 901.18(D). An order may be appealed to the City. The decision of the City may be appealed to the Mayor whose decision shall be final. If not appealed, within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the Provider shall present proof to the City that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the City may revoke the Permit pursuant to Section 901.15e. 
(P)  Other Obligations. 
(1)  Obtaining a Construction Permit does not relieve Permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary Permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other Laws. 
(2)  Permittee shall comply with all requirements of all Laws, including the Ohio Utility Protection Service. 
(3)  Permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable Laws and standards, and is responsible for all work done in the Rights-of-Way pursuant to its Permit, regardless of who performs the work. 
(4)  No Rights-of-Way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an Emergency as outlined in Section 901.15(D)(1). 
(5)  Permittee shall not obstruct a Right-of-Way so that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. The City may waive this requirement if it is technically or economically unreasonable in the circumstances. 
(6)  Private vehicles other than necessary Construction vehicles may not be parked within or adjacent to a Permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to a Permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the Permit. 
(Q)  Undergrounding Required. Any owner of property abutting upon a street or alley where Service Facilities are now located underground and where the Service connection is at the property line, shall install or cause others to install underground any Service delivery infrastructure from the property line to the buildings or other structures on such property to which such Service is supplied. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by Chapter 901, a Provider shall locate Facilities underground at the request of an adjacent property owner, provided that such placement of Facilities underground is consistent with the Provider's normal construction and operating standards and that the additional costs of such undergrounding over the normal aerial or above ground placement costs of identical Facilities are borne directly by the property owner making the request. A Provider, under any circumstance shall, upon the reasonable request of the City, always use Best Efforts to place Facilities underground. Where technically possible and not economically unreasonable or unsafe (based upon the technology employed and Facilities installed), all Facilities to be installed by a Provider under the Right-of-Way shall be installed in conduit. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.14. - Minor maintenance permit. 
(A)  Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit Requirement. No Person shall perform Minor Maintenance of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way without first having obtained a Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit as set forth in this chapter. Minor Maintenance means: (i) the routine repair or replacement of Facilities with like Facilities not involving Construction and not requiring traffic control for more than two (2) hours at any one location; (ii) or the routine repair or replacement of Facilities with like Facilities not involving Construction and taking place on thoroughfares and arteries between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; (iii) or the routine repair or replacement of Facilities with like Facilities not involving construction on all Rights-of-Ways, other than thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede traffic and is for a period of less than eight (8) contiguous hours; (iv) or Construction other than on thoroughfares and arterials that takes less than eight (8) contiguous hours to complete, does not impede traffic and does not involve a pavement cut. The City may adopt Rules and Regulations pursuant to Section 901.06(E) that clarify the definition of Minor Maintenance and/or provide a process for a Provider to determine whether particular activity constitutes Minor Maintenance. 
(1)  A Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit allows the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permittee to perform all minor maintenance in any part of the Rights-of-Way as required. 
(2)  A Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit is valid from the date of issuance until revoked by the City. 
(3)  A Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance permit must be displayed or upon request produced within twelve (12) business hours. 
(4)  A Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit by itself shall under no circumstances provide a Permittee with the ability to cut pavement without seeking additional authority from the City. 
(B)  Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit Applications. Application for a Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit shall be made to the City. In addition to any information required by the City, all Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit Applications shall contain, and will only be considered complete upon compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Credible evidence that the Applicant has obtained a Certificate of Registration or proof that the Applicant has written authority to apply for a Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit on behalf of a party that has been issued a Certificate of Registration. 
(2)  Submission of a completed Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit Application in the form required by the City. 
(3)  A statement that the Applicant will employ protective measures and devices that, consistent with the OMUTCD, will prevent injury or damage to Persons or property and to minimize disruptions to the efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(C)  Issuance of Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permits; Conditions. 
(1)  If the City determines that the Applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter and the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit process, the City shall issue a Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The City may impose reasonable conditions, in addition to the Rules and Regulations enacted by the City, upon the issuance of the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit and the performance of the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the Rights-of-Way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the Rights-of-Way, to protect the City's investment in the Right-of-Way, or to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(D)  Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit Fees. The City shall not charge a fee for the issuance of the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit but may revoke the Right-of-Way Minor Maintenance Permit as any other Permit may be revoked under this chapter. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.15. - Enforcement of permit obligation. 
(A)  Mandatory Denial of Permit. Except in the case of an Emergency, no Permit will be granted: 
(1)  To any Person who has not yet made an Application; 
(2)  To any Person who has outstanding debt owed to the City unless payment in full has been placed in an escrow account approved by the City; 
(3)  To any Person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a Permit; or 
(4)  If, in the discretion of the City, the issuance of a Permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The City, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the Rights-of-Way considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare and/or the City's investment in the Right-of-Way. 
(B)  Permissive Denial of Permit. The City may deny a Permit in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and/or protect the City's investment in the Right-of-Way to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the Rights-of-Way, or when necessary to protect the Rights-of-Way and its users. 
(1)  The City, in his/her discretion, may consider one or more of the following factors: 
(a)  The extent to which Rights-of-Way space where the Permit is sought is available; and/or 
(b)  The competing demands for the particular space in the Rights-of-Way; and/or 
(c)  The availability of other locations in the Rights-of-Way or in other Rights-of-Way for the proposed Facilities; and/or 
(d)  The applicability of Chapter 901 or other regulations of the Rights-of-Way that affect location of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way; and/or 
(e)  The degree of compliance of the Provider with the terms and conditions of its Certificate of Registration, Chapter 901, and other applicable ordinances and regulations; and/or 
(f)  The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from the use of that part of the Rights-of-Way; and/or 
(g)  The condition and age of the Rights-of-Way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial re-construction; and/or 
(h)  The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the Rights-of-Way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the Rights-of-Way; and/or 
(i)  Whether such Applicant or its agent has failed within the past three (3) years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with, the requirements of Chapter 901 or, if applicable, any other Law. 
(2)  Under no circumstances will open cutting take place on any street except where: 
(a)  An absolute emergency situation constitutes that an open cut is necessary; and/or 
(b)  Vital services to resident(s) or business(es) are needed or have been cut off and there is no reasonable alternative (such as jacking or boring) in supplying or restoring such services; and/or 
(c)  The City determines it is in the best interests of the City that such an open cut take place. 
(C)  Discretionary Issuance of Permit. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 901.15(A)(1) and 901.15(A)(2), the City may issue a Permit in any case where the Permit is necessary; 
(a)  To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the Permit Applicant, if established by Credible evidence satisfactory to the City; or 
(b)  To allow such customer to materially improve its Service; or 
(c)  To allow a new economic development project to be granted a Permit under this section. 
(2)  To be granted a Permit under this Section, the Permit Applicant must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of Service, or the development project when it was required to submit its list of next year projects. 
(D)  Work Done Without A Permit in Emergency Situations. 
(1)  Each Provider shall, as soon as is practicable, immediately notify the City of any event regarding its Facilities which it considers to be an Emergency. The Provider may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the Emergency. Within five (5) business days, unless otherwise extended by the City, after the occurrence or discovery of the Emergency (whichever is later), the Provider shall apply for the necessary Permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with Chapter 901 for any and all actions taken in response to the Emergency. In the event that the City becomes aware of an Emergency regarding a Provider's Facilities, the City shall use Best Efforts to contact the Provider or the System Representative of each Provider affected, or potentially affected, by the Emergency. In any event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the Emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the Provider whose Facilities caused the Emergency. 
(2)  Except in the case of an Emergency, any Provider who Constructs in, on, above, within, over, below or through a Rights-of-Way without a valid Permit must subsequently obtain a Permit, pay double the calculated fee for said Permit, pay double all the other fees required by the Code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the Rights-of-Way and comply with all of the requirements of Chapter 901. 
(E)  Revocation of Permits. 
(1)  Permittees hold Permits issued pursuant to the Code as a privilege and not as a right. The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any Permit, without refunding any fees, in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any Law, or any provision or condition of the Permit. A substantial breach by Permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  The violation of any provision or condition of the Permit; 
(b)  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or condition of the Permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens; 
(c)  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the Application for a Permit; 
(d)  The failure to maintain the required Construction or Removal Bonds and/or insurance; 
(e)  The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when required, a Certificate of Registration; 
(f)  The failure to complete the Construction in a timely manner; or 
(g)  The failure to correct a condition of an order issued pursuant to Section 901.13(O)(3). 
(2)  If the City determines that the Permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any Law or any condition of the Permit, the City shall serve a written demand upon the Permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the Permit. Upon a substantial breach, as stated above, the City may place additional or revised conditions on the Permit. 
(3)  By the close of the next business day following receipt of notification of the breach, Permittee shall contact the City with a plan, acceptable to the City, for its correction. Permittee's failure to so contact the City, or the Permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or Permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the Permit. 
(4)  If a Permittee commits a second substantial default as outlined above, Permittee's Permit will automatically be revoked and the Permittee will not be allowed further Permits for up to and including one (1) full year, except for Emergency repairs. 
(5)  If a Permit is revoked, the Permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including Restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.16. - Construction and removal bonds. 
(A)  Construction Bond. Prior to the commencement of any Construction, a Construction Permittee, excluding the County, shall deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in an amount determined by the City to be appropriate based upon fair and reasonable criteria. Unless a Construction default, problem or deficiency involves an Emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the City shall serve written notice to the Construction Permittee detailing the Construction default, problem or deficiency. If the City determines that correction or repair of the Construction default, problem or deficiency has not occurred or has not been substantially initiated within ten (10) calendar days after the date following service and notification and detailing the Construction default, problem or deficiency, then the City may attach the letter of credit or surety bond. Upon attachment, written notice shall be served on the Construction Permittee by the City. 
(B)  Removal Bond. Upon issuance of a Certificate of Registration and continuously thereafter, and until one hundred twenty (120) days after a Provider's Facilities have been removed from the Rights-of-Way, (unless the City notifies the Provider that a reasonably longer period shall apply), a Provider shall deposit with the City and maintain an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond in an amount equal to or greater than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), the City shall make all reasonable efforts to allow Provider a period of five (5) calendar days after serving notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem or deficiency prior to the City attachment of the letter of credit or surety bond regarding the removal of Facilities. Upon attachment, written notice shall be provided to the Provider by the City. 
(C)  Blanket Bond. 
(1)  In lieu of the Construction Bond required by Section 901.16(A) and the Removal Bond required by Section 901.16(B), Provider may deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in the amount of Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00). Unless a Construction default, problem or deficiency involves an Emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the City shall make all reasonable effort to allow Permittee a period of five (5) calendar days after sending notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem or deficiency prior to City's attachment of the letter of credit or surety bond. 
(D)  Self Bonding. In lieu of the Construction Bond required by Section 901.16(A), the Removal Bond required by Section 901.16(B) and the Blanket Bond required by Section 901.16(C), those Providers maintaining a book value in excess of Fifty Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00) may submit a statement to the City requesting to self-bond. If approval to self-bond is granted, a Provider shall assure the City that such self-bonding shall provide the City with no less protection and security than would have been afforded to the City by a third party surety providing Provider with the types and amounts of bonds detailed in the above named Sections. This statement shall include: 
(1)  Audited financial statements for the previous year; and 
(2)  A description of the Applicant's self-bonding program. 
(3)  Other applicable and pertinent information as reasonably requested by the City. 
(E)  Purposes. 
(1)  The bonds required by this section, and any self-bonding to the extent it has been permitted, shall serve as security for: 
(a)  The faithful performance by the Permittee or Provider of all terms, conditions and obligations of Chapter 901; 
(b)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by the Permittee or Provider's violation of Chapter 901 or its failure to comply with all rules, regulations, orders, Permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to Chapter 901; 
(c)  The payment of all compensation due to the City, including Permit Fees; 
(d)  The payment of premiums (if any) for the liability insurance required pursuant to Chapter 901; 
(e)  The removal of Facilities from the Rights-of-Way pursuant to Chapter 901; 
(f)  The payment to the City of any amounts for which the Permittee or Provider is liable that are not paid by its insurance or other surety; and 
(g)  The payment of any other amounts which become due to the City pursuant to Chapter 901 or the Law. 
(F)  Form. The bond documents required by this Section and any replacement bond documents shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by the surety until ninety (90) days after completion of Construction of the Facilities and, notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed by the surety until at least ninety (90) days' written notice to City of surety's intention to cancel or not renew this bond." 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.17. - Indemnification and liability. 
(A)  City Does Not Accept Liability. By reason of the acceptance of an Application, the grant of a Permit or the issuance of a Certificate of Registration, the City does not assume any liability: 
(1)  For injuries to Persons, damage to property, or loss of Service claims; or 
(2)  For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of Facilities. 
(B)  Indemnification. 
(1)  By applying for and being issued a Certificate of Registration with the City a Provider is required, or by accepting a Permit a Permittee is required to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City's agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors from all costs, liabilities, claims, and suits for damages of any kind arising out of the Construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its Facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or on a Rights-of-Way, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a Permit. A Provider or Permittee shall not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the City's agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers, and subcontractors for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of its Facilities, or any activity undertaken in or near a Rights-of-Way, whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a Permit. This Section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the Provider, Permittee or to the City; and the Provider or Permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the City, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf. Any and all exercise of the above shall be consistent with, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  To the fullest extent permitted by Law, all Providers and Permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, agents, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including without limitation worker's compensation claims against the City or others), causes of actions, actions, liability, and judgments for injury or damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by the City in connection therewith); and 
i.  Persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of Provider or Permittee, its subcontractors, agents or employees attributable to the occupation by the Provider or Permittee of the Rights-of-Way, to which Provider's or Permittee's negligence shall in any way contribute, and regardless of whether the City's negligence or the negligence of any other party shall have contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or damage; 
ii.  Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other right of any person, firm and corporation by the Provider, but excluding claims arising out of or related to The City's actions; and 
iii.  Arising out of Provider or Permittee's failure to comply with the provisions of Law applicable to Provider or Permittee in its business hereunder. 
(2)  The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the City: 
(a)  Giving Provider or Permittee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is sought; 
(b)  Affording the Provider or Permittee the opportunity to participate in any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; 
(c)  Cooperate in the defense of such claim and making available to the Provider or Permittee all pertinent information under the City's control. 
(3)  The City shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense thereof, and the Provider or Permittee shall pay all reasonable fees and expenses of such separate counsel if employed. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.18. - General provisions. 
(A)  Non-exclusive Remedy. The remedies provided in Chapter 901 are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the City may have at Law or in equity. The City is hereby authorized at any time to seek legal and equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the public Rights-of-Way, including damages to the Rights-of-Way, whether caused by a violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 901 or other provisions of the Code. 
(B)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of Chapter 901 is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any Permit, right or any portions of this section are illegal or unenforceable, then any such Permit or right granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable Permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable Permit shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the Permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the Permit and the right of termination. If a Permit or right shall be considered a revocable Permit as provided herein, the Permittee must acknowledge the authority of the City to issue such revocable Permit and the power to revoke it. 
(C)  Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The City, by the granting of a Permit or by issuing a Certificate of Registration pursuant to Chapter 901, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the City under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Ohio and under the Charter of the City of Marysville to regulate the use of the Rights-of-Way. The Permittee by its acceptance of a Permit, or Provider by applying for and being issued a Certificate of Registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as now are or the same as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time. A Permittee or Provider is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general Laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to such powers. 
(D)  Method of Service. Any notice or order of the City shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to the last known fax number of the person to be served; 
(3)  Left at the usual place of business of the person to whom it is to be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or older; 
(4)  Sent by certified, preposted U.S. mail to the last known address; 
(5)  If the notice is attempted to be served by certified, preposted U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or the certified letter is not returned within fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing, then notice may be sent by regular, preposted, first-class U.S.; 
(6)  If the notice is attempted to be served by regular, first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or is not returned within fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure, building, premises or property affected by such notice. 
(E)  Applies to All Providers. Chapter 901 shall apply to all Providers and all Permittees unless expressly exempted. 
(F)  Police Powers. All Persons' rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. All persons shall comply with all applicable Laws enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all persons shall comply with City zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of Facilities. 
(G)  Compliance. No Person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of Chapter 901 by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
(H)  Foreclosure and Receivership. 
(1)  Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the Bankruptcy Code by or against any Provider and/or Permittee, or any action for foreclosure or other judicial sale of the Provider and/or Permittee Facilities located within the Rights-of-Way, the Provider and/or Permittee shall so notify the City within fourteen (14) calendar days thereof and the Provider and/or Permittee's Certificate of Registration or Permit (as applicable) shall be deemed void and of no further force and effect. 
(2)  The City shall have the right to revoke, pursuant to the provisions of the Code, any Certificate of Registration or Permit granted pursuant to Chapter 901, subject to any applicable provisions of Law, including the Bankruptcy Code, one hundred and twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the Provider and/or Permittee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred and twenty (120) days or unless: 
(a)  Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of the relevant Certificate of Registration, any outstanding Permit, Chapter 901, and remedied all defaults thereunder; and 
(b)  Said receiver or trustee, within said one hundred and twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction over the Facilities, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provisions of the relevant Certificate of Registration, Permit and Chapter 901. 
(I)  Choice of Law and Forum. This Chapter 901 and the terms and conditions of any Certificate of Registration or Permit shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive Laws of the City, State of Ohio and United States, in that order. As a condition of the grant of any Permit or issuance of any Certificate of Registration all disputes shall be resolved in a court of competent jurisdiction for Union County, Ohio. 
(J)  Force Majeure. In the event any Person's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by Chapter 901 is prevented by a cause or event not within such Person's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a Provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. 
(K)  No Warranty. The City makes no representation or warranty regarding its right to authorize the Construction of Facilities on any particular Rights-of-Way. The burden and responsibility for making such determination shall be upon the Person installing Facilities in the Rights-of-Way. 
(L)  Continuing Obligation and Holdover. In the event a Provider or Permittee continues to operate all or any part of the Facilities after the termination, lapse, or revocation of a Certificate of Registration, such Provider or Permittee shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other Laws throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the Certificate of Registration, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution. Any conflict between the issuance of a Certificate of Registration or of a Permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(M)  Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the City required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified U.S. mail to the City as specified in this chapter 901. 
(N)  City Facilities. As part of City required standards wherever Rights-of-Way are under Construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by the City, the City may install all such Facilities deemed necessary to accommodate future Provider needs. Any such installed Facilities shall be City property and may be conveyed to any Person under such terms and conditions as are deemed advisable by the City. 
(O)  Section Headings. Section headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 901.99. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the remedy of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction the following penalties shall apply: 
(A)  Any Person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth (4th) degree. Each day such violation continued shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 905. - SIDEWALKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury,  521.04; duty to keep sidewalks clean and in repair,  521.06. 
State Law reference- Notice to construct or repair sidewalks, ORC 729.03 et seq. 

Sec. 905.01. - Sidewalk construction. 
All sidewalks constructed, replaced or repaired in the Municipality shall be in accordance with the standard construction drawings on file with the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2-83. Passed 1-13-1983.) 
Sec. 905.02. - Permit required. 
No sidewalk shall be constructed, replaced or repaired within the Municipality without the owner applying for, and receiving a written permit therefor from the City Engineer or Director of Administration. 
(Ord. 2-83. Passed 1-13-1983.) 
Sec. 905.03. - Permit fee. 
The City shall levy a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for issuing the permit specified in Section 905.02 and Section 1100.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 64-03. Passed 12-18-2003.) 
Sec. 905.04. - Supervision of construction. 
The construction or reconstruction of any sidewalks shall be as directed by Council and under the supervision of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 291. Passed 6-28-1928.) 
Sec. 905.05. - Grading lawn areas adjoining sidewalks. 
All lawns adjoining sidewalks shall be graded and sloped by the owner so as to furnish drainage and proper slope for seeding within such time and as may be directed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 291. Passed 6-28-1928.) 
Sec. 905.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
TITLE THREE - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
CHAPTER 921. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Sewer rates, Ch. 925. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate water closets and privies, ORC 715.40; power to construct sewerage system, ORC 715.40, 717.01; compulsory sewer connections, ORC 729.06; regulations to control house sewers and connections, ORC 729.51; assessments, ORC 729.07 et seq. 

Sec. 921.01. - Use of public sewers. 
(A)  All definitions set forth in Section 900.01 shall apply to this chapter. 
(B)  No person shall discharge any wastewater or other polluted waters into any natural outlet within the City or into any area under the jurisdiction of the City. 
(C)  No person shall construct or maintain any septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater without first obtaining the required permits from the Union County Health Department and receiving permission from the City. 
(D)  No person shall discharge into the owner service lateral the surface water which collects in basement or foundation excavations. If the owner service lateral is complete before the plumbing can be connected thereto, the builder or sewer tapper shall keep the end of the owner service lateral closed with a watertight plug. 
(E)  The owner of a house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, Right-of-Way or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the rules and regulations within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided the foundation wall of the structure from which the wastewater or other wastes originated is less than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest boundary of the Right-of-Way or public utility easement within which the sewer is located. 
(F)  No person shall be permitted to connect to or discharge wastewater to the City wastewater system unless it has been determined by the City that there is sufficient capacity in the system to collect, convey and treat the proposed wastewater discharge of such person. 
(G)  The Ohio Reformatory for Women shall have a maximum wastewater discharge of 250,000 gallons per day into the Collins Avenue ten-inch gravity trunk sewer. When the consumption exceeds 250,000 gallons per day, the Ohio Reformatory for Women shall construct, at its cost, a new sanitary sewer that connects to an eighteen-inch gravity trunk sewer extending from Fifth Street to Collins Avenue. The Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Corrections shall remit on behalf of the Ohio Reformatory for Women to the City the prorata share of the actual cost of the eighteen-inch gravity trunk sewer to be utilized by the capacity of its fifteen-inch sanitary sewer service line. 
(H)  The Milford Avenue Sewer District shall be operated under the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville, Ohio including Chapter 921, Wastewater System Rules and Regulations, and Chapter 925, Sewer Rates, all Federal and State laws relating to sewers and sewer usage, and all administrative regulations implementing City Ordinances, State, and Federal laws. 
(I)  The City of Marysville has constructed a sanitary trunk sewer known as the Northside Trunk Sewer. The actual cost of the Northside Trunk Sewer excluding oversizing shall be reimbursed to the City on a per acre or portion thereof basis for every user of the Northside Trunk Sewer. Use of the Northside Trunk Sewer shall be defined as either connection by direct customer service line and/or connection of other sanitary sewer trunk lines to the Northside Trunk Sewer. The Northside Trunk Sewer acreage fee shall be remitted before connection to the Northside Trunk Sewer is made. The Northside Trunk Sewer acreage fee shall remain in effect until the actual cost has been recovered. The map of the Northside Trunk Sewer service area, actual cost of construction and calculation of the acreage fee shall be available for public inspection (upon completion of construction and acceptance of the line) at the City. 
(J)  The Adena Pointe Sewer District shall be operated under the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville, Ohio including Chapter 921. Wastewater System Rules and Regulations. and Chapter 925. Wastewater Rates, all Federal and State laws relating to sewers and sewer usages, and all administrative regulations implementing City Ordinances, State and Federal laws. 
(K)  The wastewater components for the Jerome Village development shall be operated under these Codified Ordinances, including Chapter 921. Wastewater System Rules and Regulations. and Chapter 925. Sewer Rates, all federal and state laws relating to sewers and sewer usage, all administrative regulations implementing City ordinances, state and federal laws. The Service Agreement between the following entities: the Jerome Village Community Authority; Union County and the City of Marysville shall control the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of this infrastructure. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 5-14. Passed 2-27-2014.) 
Sec. 921.02. - Conditions for connection. 
(A)  All parcels included within the City of Marysville Growth Area may connect to the City Utility system provided that all rules and regulations are met and an annexation agreement is signed by the property owner. This language shall generally state "Annexation of this property to the City shall occur (at the discretion of the City) when this property becomes contiguous to the City." 
(B)  All parcels included within the City of Marysville Exclusive Service Area may connect to the City Utility system provided that all rules and regulations are met. Properties outside of this area must obtain permission from the Union County Commissioners to connect to the City Utility System. 
(C)  The Village of Milford Center and the sewer district identified as the New California Sewer Sub District are specifically exempted from these conditions. The Village of Milford Center may utilize the City sanitary sewer system for all property and sewer lines wholly within the Village only. 
(D)  The New California Sewer Sub District may utilize the City's Sanitary Sewer System for all property and sewer lines wholly within the New California Sewer Sub District. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.03. - Permit required. 
(A)  No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. All work on the wastewater system is to be performed by a contractor licensed with the City of Marysville. 
(B)  The owner or its agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. Permit and inspection fees shall be in an amount as set by Council. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.04. - Cost to be owner's responsibility. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, repair and maintenance of the owner service lateral shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the owner service lateral. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.05. - Separate owner service laterals required; exception. 
A separate and independent owner service lateral shall be provided for every building. Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the owner service lateral from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one owner service lateral. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.06. - Use of old owner service laterals. 
Old owner service laterals may be used in connection with new buildings upon approval by the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.07. - Material specifications and construction. 
All sanitary sewers and appurtenances, including materials and installation procedures, shall be constructed and designed in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.08. - Laying the pipes; gravity or artificial flow; excavations. 
(A)  Whenever possible the owner service lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No owner service lateral shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from the frost. The owner service lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(B)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by a City approved artificial means (i.e., grinder pump) and discharged to the owner service lateral. 
(C)  All excavations required for the installation of an owner service lateral shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City via permit Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specifications specific to the City except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(D)  A backwater valve shall be installed only for plumbing fixtures where the flood level rims of the lowest plumbing fixtures are below the elevation of the cover of the next upstream manhole in the public sewer. Plumbing fixtures having flood level rims above the elevation of the cover of the next upstream manhole in the public sewer shall not discharge through a backwater valve. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.09. - Sewer sealing. 
All abandoned owner service laterals, which shall not be put in future use, shall be sealed in an appropriate manner as approved by the City. Sewer sealing may be done by the City or by others as approved by the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.10. - City notification for inspection. 
The applicant shall notify the City when the owner service lateral is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City with testing of the owner service lateral in accordance with the City requirements. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.11. - Barricades and warning lights; restoration of pavement. 
All excavations for owner service lateral installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.12. - Discharge of unpolluted drainage. 
(A)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any wastewater system. 
(B)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water, unpolluted process waters or properly treated industrial waste shall be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet if available. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.13. - Nonacceptable wastewater; pretreatment requirements. 
(A)  The City shall make and enforce rules and regulations establishing the types and characteristics of sewage, industrial wastes and other matter which shall be discharged into the wastewater system, the types and characteristics of sewage and industrial wastes admissible to the system only after pretreatment and requisites for pretreatment, and otherwise governing the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes and other matter into the system in the interest of safety and the efficient operation of the wastewater treatment plant. Applicable industrial pretreatment conditions and industrial pretreatment regulations, as promulgated under Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and detailed under 40 CFR 403, are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by reference. Any and all applicable provisions of the most current Chapter 3745-3 of the Ohio Administrative Code dealing with Pretreatment Rules are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by reference. 
(B)  An industry/commercial user must, upon application for sewer service, present to the City, on a form provided, a tabulation of the chemical analysis of the wastes to be discharged to the wastewater system and the volume of such wastes, or if this is not available, the expected waste analysis based upon similar processes now in operation. 
(C)  In accordance with the Industrial Pretreatment Program's (IPP) approved Enforcement Response Plan (ERP), Significant Industrial Users (SIU), Non-Significant Industrial User (NIU) and Categorical Industrial User (CIU) shall be issued an Industrial Wastewater Discharge User Permit authorizing discharge of wastewater to the City of Marysville wastewater system. Any and all applicable provisions of Federal or State law along with discharge points, effluent limitations, monitoring requirements and other conditions relative to required pretreatment regulations are set forth within this permit. 
(D)  Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement. No significant Industrial User (SIU) shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the City. 
Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration: A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed 5 years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than 5 years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents: An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect damage to the POTW. Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is transferrable without prior notification to the City and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on applicable Pretreatment Standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants or best management practices to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; 
(a)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the Users discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of the User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim the sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, and local law. 
(6)  Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the Superintendent to be necessary; 
(E)  In cases where the character of the sewage or industrial waste from any manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that it imposes an unreasonable burden upon the sewage collection, pumping or treatment works, greater than that imposed by the average sewage entering the wastewater system, the City may: 
(1)  Compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises to pre-treat such sewage in such manner as specified by the City before discharging it into the wastewater system. 
(2)  Slug Discharges: Require flow control or equalization of such wastes so as to avoid any slug loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment works. The Superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be required to control Slug Discharges. SIUs are required to notify the Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug Discharge; or 
(3)  Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes. 
(4)  SIUs shall submit the required information to determine compliance with BMP (Best Management Practices under these rules. Documentation of compliance with BMP requirements must be maintained as part of the SIU's record-keeping requirements. 
(F)  Local Limits: The superintendent is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).No waste contributor shall cause to be discharged any industrial waste unless issued a wastewater discharge permit by the City. Maximum pollutant discharge concentrations in the discharge permits shall be determined in accordance with "local limits" approved by OEPA Mass-based limits may be specified for any or all of the listed pollutants where applicable. The discharge of non-acceptable industrial wastewater into the wastewater system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited. Wastewater shall be deemed non-acceptable when the concentration of harmful or toxic substances in the wastewater exceeds certain tolerable limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against Pass Through and Interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations in excess of following Local Limits: 
Parameter Maximum for Any One (1) Day Quantity Unit Copper 0.860 mg/l Cyanide (Free) 0.106 mg/l Lead 0.540 mg/l Mercury 0.0016 mg/l Nickel 0.754 mg/l Silver 0.265 mg/l Zinc 1.220 mg/l Oil & Grease 50.0 mg/l pH (lower bound) 5.5 S.U. pH (upper bound) 12.0 S.U.  
In the absence of such specific wastewater discharge permit conditions, no person shall discharge any of the above pollutants, except as such pollutants may occur, and only in the concentrations such pollutants may occur, in the water supplied to the premises. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.14. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(A)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors designated as pretreatment devices by OEPA, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary to prevent the discharge of fats, oils, greases (commonly referred to as FOG), any inflammable wastes, sand and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system, the public sewer, or POTW plant or processes except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City. The size, type and location of each interceptor shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this section based on the anticipated conditions of use. Wastes that do not require treatment or separation shall not be discharge into any interceptor or separator. The interceptor shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for a total and complete cleaning and inspection. Details of this section to not preclude the City from promulgating additional specifications and requirements as necessary to protect the wastewater system. 
(B)  Monitor: The device/system shall be equipped with a downstream monitoring well on the discharge line. The monitor well shall be of sufficient size to permit checking and sampling the waste for residual FOG. The system shall be equipped with an electronic monitoring system to notify the owner that service is required. 
(C)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of materials impervious to and will not deteriorate by being in contact with the FOG laden wastes and capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(D)  Industrial and commercial users discharging grease and oil and/or inorganic materials such as sand and grit, shall install interceptors to reduce these waste characteristics to levels in accord with this chapter. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at their expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Plans showing the size, location and cleanouts for such facilities shall be submitted to the City for approval. Cleaning of interceptor facilities shall be on a routine basis, as recommended by the City. Cleaning shall be performed by a licensed waste hauler. Evidence of cleaning, in the form of a receipt copy, shall be sent to the City for their records, on a routine basis. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.15. - Preliminary treatment by owner. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at their expense. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.16. - Wastewater monitoring and inspection. 
(A)  All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant system shall maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows, and pollutant amounts and concentrations of such pollutants as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and any applicable State or Federal pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(B)  All monitoring and inspection records shall be made available upon request by the City. All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the OEPA or USEPA, upon demand. 
(C)  If so ordered by the City, the owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial wastes into the system shall install, at their own cost and expense, suitable monitoring/sampling equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all times. 
(D)  The monitoring/sampling equipment shall be located and maintained on the industrial user's premises outside of the building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the City may allow such facility to be constructed in the public Right-of-Way, with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of such Right-of-Way, and located so that the facility will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(E)  When more than one user discharges into an existing common sewer, the City may require the installation of separate monitoring/sampling equipment for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the City may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each discharge. 
(F)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. 
(G)  Compliance determinations with respect to the prohibitions and limitations stated in Section 921.16 may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined to be necessary by the City, in order to meet the needs of specific circumstances. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.17. - Sampling and inspection of industrial wastes. 
(A)  Waste Sampling. 
(1)  Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination, with respect to the prohibitions and limitations stated in Section 921.02(G), will be done at such intervals as designated by the City. All records of sampling and other information must be kept for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(2)  Duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharge to the community system in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Duly authorized City employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. Information data submitted to the City with respect to the Industrial Pretreatment Program shall be made available to the general public or other governmental agencies. Industrial users may request that such information be kept as confidential files if the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the City as confidential shall be kept in a locked file cabinet, and shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or the general public without the written consent of the industrial user. 
(4)  While performing necessary work for private properties referred to in subsection (A)(3) hereof, the City, or duly authorized employees thereof shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. 
(B)  Analyses. 
(1)  Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with the current edition of "Standard Methods" or "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste" published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and performed in accordance with procedures established by the Ohio EPA In addition, all measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater shall also be made in conformance with the Federal Register (40 CFR Part 136). 
(2)  A determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes may be made by the person discharging them or by a qualified agent, as approved by the City. If deemed appropriate, the City shall make its own analyses of the wastes and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for compliance determination and charges, except as provided in subsection (E) hereof. 
(C)  Measurement of Flow. 
(1)  The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste surcharges shall be the metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the City. 
(2)  If the person discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers procures any part or all of this water from sources other than the City water system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, such person shall install and maintain, at their expense, water meters of a type approved by the City for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from such other sources. 
(3)  Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the City if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by such person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the City. 
(D)  Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, to the wastewater system, any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 105 degrees Fahrenheit at a point of discharge or causing the temperature at the treatment facility to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degree Centigrade; using the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21, as amended; 
(3)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair, or any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the wastewater treatment system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and/or safety problems; 
(4)  Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 12.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater system; 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime, chemical or paint residues, cannery wastes, bulk solids or any other solid object or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow of sewage or the operation of the wastewater system; 
(6)  Any water or waste containing a toxic or hazardous waste listed in 40 CFR 261, as amended, in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard or humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage system; 
(7)  Any water or waste containing emulsified oil or grease exceeding, on analysis, an average of fifty (50.0) milligrams of oil and grease per liter determined as total hexane-soluble matter; 
(8)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions of the sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
(9)  Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such character or quality that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the sewage treatment plant. 
(10)  Any water or waste discharged in large enough quantities to cause a violation of the City's NPDES permit or to make the sludge unsuitable for reclamation; 
(11)  Any water or waste discharged in large enough quantities to cause the effluent from the treatment works to be objectionably colored or such color as to interfere with any process including particularly disinfection; 
(12)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such a half-life or concentration as may exceed limits in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations; or 
(13)  Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin if discharged in amounts that can pass through or cause interference. 
Such list is subject to revisions as required to meet current water quality standards imposed by State or Federal agencies. 
In all such cases, the provisions set forth in the City ordinances establishing sewer service charges will be governing factors in any contracts entered into. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.18. - Accidental discharges. 
(A)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent an accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or operator's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify their facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this chapter, the facility responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the City so that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to the City detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge, and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges, shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility within five (5) days of the occurrence of the non-complying discharge. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.19. - Powers and authority of the city. 
The City shall make and enforce rules and regulations subject to approval of Council, establishing the types and characteristics of the wastewater and industrial wastes and other matter, not specifically covered in this chapter, which shall not be discharged into the wastewater system and the types and characteristics of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes admissible to the sewer system only after pretreatment. The City shall make and enforce rules and regulations establishing details, specifications, inspections, construction methods and other related work necessary to protect the wastewater system. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.20. - Right of entry of authorized city employees. 
City Authorized Employees, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.21. - Unauthorized work on wastewater system prohibited. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater system or wastewater treatment plant. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.22. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
Upon the promulgation of Federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industry, the Federal standard, if more stringent, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. All affected users shall be notified of applicable reporting requirements, reports and compliance dates. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.23. - Dilution of wastes. 
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.24. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained within this section shall be interpreted as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial facility, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment (therefore subject to payment by the industrial facility) provided all applicable national and state pretreatment standards are met. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.25. - Disclosure statements. 
(A)  All significant users proposing to connect or contribute to the wastewater treatment facilities are required to file a disclosure statement and receive approval from the City. The following information must be supplied on the disclosure statement: 
(1)  The name, address and location (if different from the address); 
(2)  The SIC number according to the SIC Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(4)  The time and duration of the contribution; 
(5)  The average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by their size, location and elevation; 
(7)  A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City, State or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); 
(b)  No increment referred to in subsection (A)(9)(a) shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(c)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the City, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date, and if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the City. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production; 
(11)  The type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  The number and type of employees and hours of operation of the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; and 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information such as, but not limited to, spill and accident prevention, plans, methods of operation and methods of discharge, and disclosure of any on-site materials identified in 40 CFR 261, as amended, as toxic or hazardous wastes. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may authorize the industry to discharge subject to the terms and conditions of this section. 
(B)  Any user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards must submit, within nine (9) months, a revised disclosure form of the information required by subsections (A)(8) and (9) hereof. 
(C)  Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards, or as required by the City the industry shall submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants and the average and maximum daily flows for those processes which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. Industrial users subject to equivalent units must include a reasonable measure of long term production. Industrial users subject to production based standard must include the actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
(D)  The City will issue permits to discharge to all industrial users and significant users to control the users' discharge to the wastewater system and the ensure compliance with any regulation established by this chapter, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The general and specific discharge prohibitions; 
(2)  Compliance with specific local discharge limits; 
(3)  The applicable Federal categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(4)  Compliance with categorical standards reporting requirements. 
An administrative order will be in the form of a written notice from the City and may be served upon any user by a duly authorized representative of the City or by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
(E)  At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the City a report which contains the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the industrial user; 
(2)  The location of such industrial user; 
(3)  The nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user; 
(4)  The average and maximum flow of the discharge from such industrial user to the wastewater treatment system, in gallons per day; 
(5)  The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process from such industrial user and identification of the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The concentration shall be reported as a maximum or average level as provided for in the applicable pretreatment standards; 
(6)  The report shall be signed by a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user submitting the report is a corporation; by a general partner if the industrial user is a partnership; or by a duly authorized representative of the individual named above if the authorization is made in writing by the individual described above; and the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates; and the written authorization is submitted to the City. 
(F)  All industrial users shall promptly notify the City in advance of any changes in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes under 40 CFR 403.12(p), as amended. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.26. - Enforcement. 
(A)  The City may take steps as are necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of people or to the environment, which causes interference to the treatment facilities or which causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Such steps include the emergency termination of water and sewer service. 
(B)  Any user who violates any of the following conditions or applicable State and Federal regulations is subject to termination of wastewater treatment service: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(C)  Whenever the City finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, or their permit to discharge, the City may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan including a compliance schedule, for the satisfactory correction thereof, shall be submitted to the City by the user. 
(D)  At least annually, the City shall publish a list of all industrial users which at any time during the previous twelve months were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant non-compliance if its violations meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment of human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules or other reports required by the City; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the City determines will or has adversely affected the operation or implementation of the City's pretreatment program. 
(E)  No person shall fail to comply with this section. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.27. - Monitoring. 
All sampling done by the industrial user on its discharged waste must be reported on the self-monitoring reports. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.28. - Discharge of hauled waste. 
The City shall make and enforce rules and regulations concerning hauled waste as provided for in this chapter including source/characteristic information. No person shall access the sewer system or wastewater plant for any activity including discharge of hauled septic or industrial waste except at locations, under procedures, and at times designated by the City. Any removal of manhole lids, or other access to the sewer system for the purpose of discharging wastes at times and/or locations other than those designated by the City, or without the expressed permission of the City, shall be considered a violation and shall be subject to enforcement action including fines and penalties as provided in Section 921.99. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 921.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on the second offense, nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each additional offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
(B)  Whoever violates Section 921.21 Unauthorized Work on Wastewater System Prohibited shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 925. - WASTEWATER RATES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Wastewater System Rules and Regulations, Ch. 921. 
State Law reference- Compulsory sewer connections, ORC 729.06 

Sec. 925.01. - Wastewater rates. 
(A)  The definitions set forth in Section 900.01 apply to this chapter. 
(B)  The rates set forth in this section are hereby fixed as the fair, proportional and reasonable rates for sewer service charges and user charges based upon the metered consumption of water. In cases where large industrial users have installed sewage flow meters to measure the volume of sewage discharged to the sewage collection system, sewer service charges and user charges shall be based on metered sewage flow. If the sewage flow meter malfunctions or becomes inoperable during all or part of the billing period, sewer service charges and user charges shall be based on a volume of sewage determined by multiplying the metered water consumption during the billing period times the average ratio of metered sewage flow divided by metered water consumption for those billing periods during the preceding twelve months for which sewage flow records and water consumption records are available. All users discharging waste to the sewage collection system shall be billed for wastewater treatment services, including governmental or institutional users, such as schools, public utilities or other public buildings. 
(C)  Residential, commercial, and industrial rates per 100 cubic feet or fraction thereof: 
Tier Monthly Usage (in ft. 3 ) 2014 Effective January 1, 2015 Effective January 1, 2016 Tier #1 First 200 (or any part thereof) $10.00 $10.30 $10.61 Tier #2 Next 1300 $6.75 $6.95 $7.16 Tier #3 Next 48,500 $6.55 $6.75 $6.95 Tier #4 Over 50,000 $6.40 $6.59 $6.79 Minimum Charge $20.00 $20.60 $21.22 Note: Rates are calculated per 100 cubic feet or fraction thereof  
(D)  Per the Asset Purchase Agreement (dated December 19, 2005) between the City and Union County, all customers outside the City Corporation Limits will be assessed capacity fees and user rates equivalent to a rate greater than sewer capacity fees and user fees charged for comparable customers located within the City of Marysville. 
(E)  Periodic sampling shall be performed on large industrial user waste in order to ensure that the concentration of ammonia (NH3-N) in its wastewater does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the concentration of ammonia usually found in normal domestic waste. 
(F)  Fees to inspect sewer lateral connections for residential properties will be assessed at the rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) at the tap and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) from the tap to the building for single-family residences. Fees to review plans and inspect sewer connections for all other instances shall be in accordance with Section 1100.01. 
(G)  The sewer service charge and user charges shall be reviewed annually by the City in order to determine whether or not they are sufficient to defray the fixed charges, amortization costs and annual costs of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system. If the difference between the total annual revenue derived and the total annual cost is sufficient to justify an increase or decrease in the sewer service charge or user charges, the City will adjust the rates as required. The purpose of the annual review is also to maintain a proportional user charge and industrial cost recovery system. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.015. - Surcharges. 
(A)  Sewage or industrial wastes above normal sewage strength, but acceptable for discharge into the wastewater system, shall be subject to a surcharge. The surcharge shall be determined on the basis of any or all five (5) constituents of the water or wastes: 
(1)  Total suspended solids (TSS); 
(2)  CBOD; 
(3)  Phosphorus; 
(4)  Ammonia-Nitrogen; and/or 
(5)  Excess pounds of oil and grease. 
(B)  When any or all the total suspended solids, the CBOD, phosphorus, ammonia-nitrogen, and oil and grease accepted for admission to the system exceeds the values of their constituents for normal sewage, the excess concentration in any or all five (5), as the case may be, shall be subject to a surcharge as follows: 
(1)  Pounds of excess suspended solids per day  $0.23/lb. = suspended solids surcharge. 
(2)  Pounds of excess CBOD per day  $0.41/lb. = CBOD surcharge. 
(3)  Pounds of excess phosphorus per day  $4.60/lb. = Phosphorus surcharge. 
(4)  Pounds of excess ammonia-nitrogen per day  $2.52/lb. = Ammonia-nitrogen surcharge. 
(5)  Pounds of excess oil and grease per day  $1.65 lb. = oil and grease surcharge. 
In addition to the surcharge, the user will pay the user charges as defined in Section 925.01(C). 
(C)  The pounds of CBOD per day, pounds of phosphorus per day, pounds of ammonia-nitrogen per day, pounds of oil and grease per day, and pounds of total suspended solids per day, above the concentrations previously described for normal strength sewage that are discharged to the wastewater system, shall be determined by the City or its authorized representative. In addition to a surcharge on CBOD, total suspended solids, phosphorus, ammonia-nitrogen, and oil and grease, the City shall have the right to surcharge any user for the discharge of any other pollutant into the sewage system or for any other reason that it deems necessary and appropriate, such as excessively high rates of discharge. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.02. - New wastewater system connections. 
(A)  New Sewer Connections: The Wastewater Capacity Fees shall be as follows: 
Meter Size 
(inches) Meter 
Equivalents 2018 Connection 
Charge ? 1.0 $6,562.00 1 2.2 $14,436.00 11/2" 6.4 $41,997.00 2" 10.0 $65,620.00 3" 20.0 $131,240.00 4" 40.0 $262,480.00 6" 64.0 $419,968.00  
The Wastewater Capacity Fees for individual units contained in a multi-unit dwelling shall be assessed, regardless of meter size, based on a seven-tenths (0.7) customer equivalent. 
(B)  Reserved. 
(C)  Adena Pointe Sewer District. An amount of four hundred dollars ($400.00) shall be collected for each residential connection in the Adena Pointe Sewer District for the purpose of funding wastewater system maintenance and improvements within the Adena Pointe sewershed. 
(D)  Section 925.02(C) shall expire upon the development of all lands or after twenty (20) years from the effective date of Ordinance 5-14, whichever occurs earlier. 
(Ord. 5-14. Passed 2-27-2014; Ord. 99-14. Passed 12-18-2014; Ord. 40-18 . Passed 6-25-2018.) 
Editor's note- Ordinance 3-07, passed January 25, 2007 permits annual indexing of the Wastewater Capacity fees based on the Municipal Cost Index. The City shall have a feasibility study completed to determine if the Capacity Fees are adequate for the City's capital project requirements every five (5) years at a minimum. Rates based on the indexing of the Capacity Fees will be effective annually by May 1. 
Editor's note- Former subsection (B) hereof was repealed by Ordinance 45-15. 
Sec. 925.03. - Exceptions. 
To determine the amount of any periodic billing for wastewater service pursuant to such special arrangements: 
(A)  Multiple families using a master meter or common service shall be billed based on the number of units utilizing the master meter or existing common service. 
(B)  When multiple businesses use the same wastewater facilities, each business shall be separately charged for wastewater usage. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.04. - Commencement of wastewater charges. 
Wastewater charges shall commence at such time as water service is provided for the property and the sewer is connected. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.05. - Billing. 
(A)  The City shall cause a bill to be mailed to each user monthly based on the water usage for the latest period available. 
(B)  The owner of the premises served shall be responsible for the payment of all wastewater service supplied to their premises. 
(C)  Bills will be mailed to the address of the premises served unless the owner requests, in writing, that they shall be sent to some other address supplied by him. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the owner from obligation to pay for service rendered when due. 
(D)  Each bill for water service remaining unpaid fifteen (15) days after the bill date shall become delinquent and subject to a five percent (5%) surcharge for late payment. 
(E)  Sewer Billing Exceptions/Modifications. 
(1)  Pool credits. There is one time per year credits for filling private swimming pools. Prior to filling the pool the customer shall call the City and request a meter reading. The City shall conduct a field verification of the pool and document the size of the pool. Once the pool is filled, the customer shall call the City and request a second meter reading. A separate pool credit will not be given if the resident has a secondary meter. Commercial accounts do not qualify for the pool credit. 
(2)  The Utility Claims Board of Appeals. This Board will establish an application and procedures as required. The Board will review applications for credits if it can be determined that there was a special circumstance for the use of the water and such water used was not returned to the wastewater system for treatment. Such circumstances may include but are not limited to: new lawn and landscape establishment, leaks, etc. Proof of such uses shall be required in the form of receipts, photographs, or other forms as required. 
(3)  Secondary meters for outside water usage . The City of Marysville offers secondary meters to customers who wish to have their outside water usage (watering lawns and gardens, washing vehicles, etc.) monitored for the sole purpose of receiving a sewer credit for that usage. Customers who have a secondary meter installed for the purpose of monitoring outside water usage are not eligible to receive the Summer sewer credit. Customers wishing to proceed with the installation of a secondary meter should follow the procedures below: 
(a)  Customers wishing to participate in the secondary meter program shall fill out an application at the City. The application will be reviewed and upon its approval, the customer shall purchase a meter from the City at the current cost. Payment shall be made to the City before the meter will be issued. 
(b)  Once payment is received, the City will schedule an appointment with the customer to have the meter installed. All plumbing and fittings shall be in place prior to the scheduling of such appointment. All material must meet City of Marysville standard specifications. 
(c)  Once the meter is installed, the secondary meter will be added to the customer's account. This will keep track of the outside water usage. 
(d)  Anyone caught tampering with the meter or making any attempts to utilize this meter or its appurtenances in any way that it was not intended, is subject to the loss of privileges of the secondary meter and penalties. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 30-16. Passed 9-12-2016; Ord. 41-18 . Passed 6-25-2018.) 
Sec. 925.06. - Vacant premises; reoccupancy. 
(A)  If a single-family residence requests water service to be temporarily disconnected, the sewer portion of the monthly utility bill will also be temporarily suspended pending re-establishment of water service to that residence. If it is determined the resident in said single-family residence continues to utilize the sewer service once water service has been disconnected that residence will be charged an amount equivalent to the minimum monthly sewer rate from the time water service was disconnected to the date of reconnection. 
(B)  In case of destruction which renders a building uninhabitable, sewer charges to that property owner or tenant shall cease as of that date. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.07. - Collection; refunds. 
(A)  All bills for sewer service delinquent as of July 15th of each year shall have a final written notice issued with full payment due by July 31st. Delinquent accounts after such final notice shall be forwarded to the County Auditor who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges and penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. At such time, the Director of Finance may certify such charges, together with a penalty of five percent (5%) thereon, to the County Auditor, who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges as penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(B)  Refunds or credits shall not be made for service discontinued for periods of less than four weeks (a full calendar month). 
(C)  Amounts of less than five dollars and one cent ($5.01) shall not be collected or refunded. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.08. - Sewer sealing. 
The cost for the City to complete this work will be completed on a "time and materials" basis. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 925.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on the second offense, nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each additional offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 930. - WATER SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Fluoridation, ORC 6111.13; water pollution, ORC 715.08, 743.25. 

Sec. 930.01. - General regulations governing connections. 
(A)  The definitions set forth in Section 900.01 apply to this chapter. 
(B)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any portion of the existing public water system without first obtaining a written permit from the City. All work on the water system is to be performed by a contractor licensed with the City of Marysville. 
(C)  The owner of a premises or their agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. 
(D)  All applications for service must state the uses to which the water is to be applied. Upon the commencement of service by the City, the customer becomes obligated to pay for the water service furnished, and both the City and the customer become obligated to abide by all the terms and provisions of the regulations then in effect and as the same may be lawfully altered, amended or otherwise modified. 
(E)  When a change of occupancy occurs in any premises receiving water service, an application by the new occupant must be made to the City. Each person accepting water service from the City without making proper application shall be deemed to be a customer for the purpose of all applicable City fees. However, the City may terminate service, upon seven (7) days' notice, until proper application is made. 
(F)  Where no notice has been given to the City of a change of occupancy for a premises, the current owner shall be liable to the City for the payment of water service. 
(G)  When an application for water service is made, or when the City deems it necessary, the City has the right to require a cash deposit to secure the payment of bills. 
(H)  No agreement will be made by the City with any applicant for residential water service until all arrearages and charges due from the applicant for water service or other services rendered by the City to the applicant at any other residential premises shall have been paid. If necessary, the City may consider outstanding customer debt on previous properties when considering termination of utility service. 
(I)  The owner of a house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, Right-of-Way or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water main of the City, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to connect to the proper public main in accordance with the rules and regulations within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided the foundation wall of the structure to which service is to be provided is less than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest boundary of the Right-of-Way or public utility easement which the water main is located. 
(J)  No person shall be permitted to connect to the City water system unless it has been determined by the City that there is sufficient capacity in the system to provide the water necessary for service. 
(K)  Reserved. 
(L)  The water components for the Jerome Village development shall be operated under these Codified Ordinances, including Chapter 930 Water Rules and Regulations and Chapter 931 Water Rates, all federal and state laws relating to waterline and water usage, all administrative regulations implementing City ordinances, state and federal laws. The Service Agreement between the following entities: the Jerome Village Community Authority; Union County and the City of Marysville shall control the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of this infrastructure. 
(M)  All parcels included within the City of Marysville Growth Area may connect to the City Utility system provided that all rules and regulations are met and an annexation agreement is signed by the property owner. This language shall generally state "Annexation of this property to the City shall occur (at the discretion of the City) when this property becomes contiguous to the City." 
(N)  All parcels included within the City of Marysville Exclusive Service Area may connect to the City Utility system provided that all rules and regulations are met. Properties outside of this area must obtain permission from the Union County Commissioners to connect to the City Utility System. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Editor's note- Former subsection (K) hereof was repealed by Ordinance 45-15. 
Sec. 930.02. - General regulations governing service. 
(A)  When the supply of water is to be temporarily shut off by the City, the City will give as much advance notice (except in case of emergency) as is practicable under the circumstances to all customers to be affected by the shut off, stating the probable duration of the interruption of services. 
(B)  In the interest of public health, mains, service lines or other pipes may not be connected with any service line or piping which the City knows or has good reasons to believe is connected with any other source of water supply, nor may such mains, service lines or other pipes be connected in any way to any piping, tank, well or other apparatus which contains liquids, chemicals or any other matter which may flow back into the public mains, service lines or other pipes and which may endanger or otherwise contaminate the water supply. 
(C)  The City shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure, regardless of cause, (except as a result of willful misconduct or negligence) in the supply of water or in the pressure, nor for any damage caused thereby, or by the bursting or breaking of any main or service line or any attachment to the mains and service lines or other facilities used by the City. All damage to a customer's boilers or other equipment depending upon pressure in mains and service lines to keep them supplied with water shall be borne exclusively by the customer. 
(D)  When an application is made for the installation of a City service line or for water service, the City shall be entitled to assume that the piping and fixtures to which the service will be supplied are in good order to receive such service, but reserves the right to inspect such facilities to assure against possible damage and cross connections. 
(E)  Water will not be provided where pipes are inferior, defective or not in compliance with City Specifications. When such conditions are discovered, the supply of water may be terminated until repairs are made. 
(F)  The City shall have the sole right to determine the size, type and location of meters, meter settings, valves, service lines and connections necessary to provide the service applied for. 
(G)  Exclusive operating control of all service lines from main to meter, and of meters and meter installations shall at all times remain with the City, and shall not be interfered with in any respect. 
(H)  When a supply of water for building construction purposes is applied for, such supply shall be furnished under the regulations applicable to regular, permanent service. Special, temporary requirements for water service may be met by applying for the same at the City. 
(I)  The customer shall not, without City consent, use water for any purpose or upon any premises not stated in the application for service. 
(J)  The City may discontinue with notice all or any part of its service to any customer for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  For the use of water for any other purpose or upon any premises not stated in their application. 
(2)  To prevent waste or reasonably avoidable loss of water. 
(3)  For tampering with any service line, meter, curb stop, curb box, seal or other appliance under the control of, or belonging to, the City. 
(4)  For continued vacancy of the premises. 
(5)  For failing to make deposit when required. 
(6)  For connecting the service line, or any pipe directly or indirectly connected therewith, with any other source of supply or with any apparatus which may, in the opinion of the City, contaminate the City's water supply. 
(7)  The denial to the City of reasonable access to the premises for purpose of inspection, installation, reading, repairing or removing meters or meter reading equipment. 
(8)  For any other violation of, or failure to comply with, the regulations of the City. 
(K)  In any case in which two or more customers are supplied through one service line, ("combined" or "common service") and the City is entitled under the preceding paragraph to discontinue service to any one of them, the City may shut off such service line. 
(L)  If a customer whose service has been discontinued for non-payment of bills or for violations of or failure to comply with the regulations of the City, desires a reconnection, such reconnection may only be made after the customer has met the conditions set forth in Chapter 931. 
(M)  When a customer's meter cannot be read for a period of thirty (30) days after the latest prior reading, the City may discontinue service to the customer upon giving seven (7) days written notice to them of its intention to do so, unless the customer shall promptly make access to the meter possible during the City's regular business hours on any day except Saturday, Sunday and holidays, and notify the City thereof. If the customer notifies the City that they can promptly make access to the meter possible only during a time and day other than during the City's regular business hours, the City shall make a charge for the actual cost of such meter reading service. 
(N)  Any employee or agent of the City seeking access to the dwelling or structure of a customer shall identify themselves, provide proper City photo identification, and shall state the reason for their visit. Upon request, the employee or agent shall identify themselves to the person responsible for the dwelling or structure. Entrance will not be sought or gained by subterfuge or force. The City shall be responsible for any damage done by its employees when such damage results from willful misconduct or negligent act and within the scope of employment. 
(O)  Complaints with regard to the character of service furnished, or to the reading or registration of meters or to the bills rendered, must be made with the City. A record of such complaint will be kept by the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.03. - Cost to be owner's responsibility. 
(A)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, repair and maintenance of the customer service line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by installation of the customer service line. 
(B)  All costs and expenses incident to or resulting from interference with the public water system or damages resulting from interference with the public water system shall be the responsibility of the person causing or creating such interference. 
(C)  It is the intent of the City to discontinue "combined" or "common services" existing combined services will be maintained. However, at such time as maintenance is required, the combined service shall be split into two separate services with costs for such services to be the responsibility of the customer. The City may require customers to install (or allow to be installed) separate service shut off valves. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.04. - Material specifications and construction. 
All water lines and appurtenances, including materials and installation procedures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.05. - Backflow prevention system required. 
(A)  If, in the judgment of the City a backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the City will give notice to the water consumer to install an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at their own expense, install an approved backflow device at a location and in a manner approved and designated by the City. Prior to approval, the backflow device must be inspected and tested as required by the City. 
(B)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the Division of Water may enter the supplier distribution system of the City, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply in the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the City and by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(C)  It shall be the duty of the City to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply where actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys or investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated as often as the City shall deem necessary for proper protection of the public water supply. 
(D)  The City shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Division of Water, for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof. On demand, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the City any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water used on such properties. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the City be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.06. - Service lines. 
(A)  The application for the installation of the City service line must state the uses to which the water is to be applied, and the correct lot and street number or other complete identification of the premises to be supplied. 
(B)  The application for installation of a City service line will be accepted subject to the conditions that there shall exist, adjacent to the premises to be served, a supply of water sufficient to provide the service requested. 
(C)  A City service line may not be used to supply more than one premises. 
(D)  Service lines shall be installed to provide for inside meter settings, except in special cases where the City has approved outside meter settings. 
(E)  The curb stop or outside meter vault shall be installed at a place designated by the City between the curb line and the property line. 
(F)  Curb stops or valves in the City's service lines are for the exclusive use and under the exclusive control of the City. 
(G)  The owner shall at their expense install, maintain and repair the customer service line. Where a service line is to be installed in a paved or improved street, the cost of removing and replacing the street surface to City Standards shall also be paid for by the applicant. 
(H)  When a leak in a customer service line is discovered, the City may turn off the water service until the leak is repaired. Without limiting the authority of the City under the preceding sentence, the City will endeavor, when the circumstances are such as to make it practicable, to give notice to the customer before discontinuing such service, in order to afford him a reasonable time to make such repairs. 
(I)  If a City service line is to be installed where any portion of the line must pass through property not owned by an applicant, the applicant must assume full responsibility for acquiring the right to pass through such property. 
(J)  When the installation of a customer service line has been completed, the owner shall leave the service line turned off until it is inspected and approved for use by the City. 
(K)  The City service line (from the curb box to the main) shall be operated and maintained by the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.07. - Metered service. 
(A)  A meter will be installed by the City after the customer service line has been inspected by the City and plumbing has been made ready for such installation by the customer. The meter and setting shall conform to specifications as they may be prescribed from time to time by the City and shall be operated and maintained by the City. 
(B)  Meters so installed shall remain the City's property and shall not be moved or tampered with in any manner. 
(C)  Each service line must be separately metered and no meter may be used to serve more than one premises, except in the instance when a special arrangement shall be entered into by the City with an applicant for service to: 
(1)  A building or combination of buildings, of the same ownership, housing two or more rental units, each of which is designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence or by a person for professional or business purposes, or both; or 
(2)  A building housing two or more units, not of the same ownership, each of which is designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence or by a person for professional or business purposes, or both, 
(3)  A mobile home or trailer park or court, of the same ownership, containing pads, lots or locations for two or more mobile homes or trailer units, not of the same ownership, each of which units is designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence for single-family occupancy or by a person for professional or business purposes, or both. 
Such special arrangement shall be entered into solely at the discretion of the City and shall provide for the metering of water service through one or more meters to two or more residential or professional business units, or combination thereof, per meter. The billing for water service shall be made to the applicant for service or their heirs, successors or assigns, who shall be considered to be the customer of the City, regardless of the ownership of the units provided with water service through such meter or meters. One billing shall be made with respect to each meter through which water service is provided pursuant to such special arrangements as specified in Chapter 931. 
(D)  All meters placed in buildings shall be located in the basement, or if there is no basement, then in the first floor, as near as possible to the point of entrance of the service line, in a clean, dry, safe place, not subject to great variation in temperature, so located as to be easily accessible for installation or disconnection and for reading, and suitable for the purpose. 
(E)  Each meter shall be located at a point approved by the City so as to measure the entire supply delivered to the premises served, and a proper place and protection for the meter shall be provided. A valve approved by the City shall be provided on the service line on the inlet side of and near the meter, and a valve on the outlet side of and near the meter. An approved backflow device shall be provided between the meter and the valve on the outlet side of the meter, if required by the City to prevent water backing up through the meter. If an approved backflow device is required, a safety valve must be inserted at some convenient point on the house piping to relieve the excess pressure due to heating water. The control of the water supply by the customer shall be by means of the separate valve, to be provided by the customer, located at the outlet side of the meter. 
(F)  Curb stops and all other valves between the main and the meter are for the exclusive use of the City and shall not be used by the customer for turning on or shutting off the water supply. 
(G)  Meters will be maintained by the City so far as ordinary wear and tear are concerned. Damages resulting from freezing within the customer's premises, hot water backflow, or negligence or purposeful act of the customer shall be paid by the customer. 
(H)  The City reserves the right to remove and test any meter at any time, and substitute another meter in its place. In case of a disputed charge for service involving a question as to the accuracy of a meter, procedures to be followed are set forth in Section 931.07 Billing and Service Claims. 
(I)  All meters used for measuring quantity of water delivered to a customer shall be in good mechanical condition and shall be adequate in size and design for the type of service which they measure and shall be accurate in accordance with AWWA Standards or the manufacturer's requirements. 
(J)  A new meter shall only be placed in service if it meets all manufacturer requirements. 
(K)  If the City finds as a result of the customer's willful act a meter seal has been broken, or any bypass inserted, or there is other evidence that the meter has been tampered with, the water may be shut off. Reconnection will not occur until the following has been paid by the customer: 
(1)  A reconnection or turn off fee as set forth in Section 931.05(C). 
(2)  The cost to restore the meter to proper working order. 
(3)  The cost of the estimated quantity of water used based on the usage history for a comparable period of time. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.08. - Private fire protection service. 
(A)  Where a customer desires both regular water service and water service to private fire protection facilities on their premises which require either or both the service line and the meter to be of a larger size or of a different type than would be approved by the City for supplying and measuring the regular water service, the fire protection service shall be supplied through a separate service line. Exceptions because of low pressure or other operational issues may be approved by the City Division of Fire when recommended in writing by the City. 
(B)  A written application for private fire protection service shall be accepted subject to the condition that there shall exist, adjacent to the premises to be served, a supply of water sufficient to provide the service. The acceptance and approval of any application for, and the furnishing of, such service shall be on the basis of pressures as they may exist in the locality, which pressures are not guaranteed by the City and may fluctuate significantly from time to time. 
(C)  Due to the unusual requirements for safety, continuity and adequacy of private fire protection service, the use of water through private fire protection facilities must and shall be limited to the combating of fires only. 
(D)  A customer applying for private fire protection service shall present to the City a complete description of the requested service, giving the details of feeder lines and connections, hydrants, sprinklers, hose connections, etc., installed or to be installed in the customer's premises, and the City shall determine whether or not such service requires metering. The rate applying to this service is a flat rate and strict compliance with these regulations is necessary in order to make the use of this type of rate practical and satisfactory. However, unusual circumstances may exist at the time the application is made, or may develop in the future, whereby it may be necessary to meter such service. The City, therefore, reserves the right, at any time, to install a meter or flow-detecting device of a type acceptable to and approved by the Ohio Insurance Service Office. The cost of such meter or flow-detecting device, and of the installation thereof, shall be paid by the customer. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.09. - Public fire protection. 
(A)  Public fire hydrants shall be installed on all mains of sufficient size hereafter constructed at spacing which shall be in conformance with reasonable utility engineering practices and as required by the Division of Fire. 
(B)  No person shall take water from any public fire hydrant, except for the purpose of combating fire. Should any other proposed use of a public fire hydrant be requested, arrangements must be made with the City and are subject to the City's approval of such use. 
(C)  Once a fire hydrant has been installed and if thereafter any person requests a change of its location for any reason, the entire cost of relocation shall be paid by the person requesting the change. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.10. - Water restriction policy. 
In the event of a drought, the City will attempt to monthly forecast our anticipated month's reserve of raw water. A policy will be established to determine the best course of action regarding voluntary water conservation steps taken by City Utility Customers. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 930.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on the second offense, nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each additional offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 931. - WATER RATES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Waterworks mortgage revenue bonds, ORC 715.09 et seq.; weekly deposit of water works money collected, ORC 743.06. 

Sec. 931.01. - Bills and payments for services. 
(A)  All definitions set forth in Section 900.01 shall apply to this chapter. 
(B)  The owner of the premises served shall be responsible for the payment of all water and water services supplied to their premises. 
(C)  Bills will be mailed to the address of the premises served unless the owner requests, in writing, that they shall be sent to some other address supplied by him. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the owner from obligation to pay for service rendered when due. 
(D)  Each bill for water service remaining unpaid fifteen (15) days after the bill date shall become delinquent and subject to a five percent (5%) surcharge for late payment. 
(E)  Bills for water service shall be rendered monthly and shall show the quantity of water and the period for which the bill is rendered. 
(F)  Bills for private fire protection shall be rendered in advance. 
(G)  A customer's bill will be accepted as "on time" if mailed on or before the past due date indicated on the bill. The stamped post office date will determine the mailing date of the customer's payment. The bill will be considered "past due" if it does not meet these stipulations. All past due bills will be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty. The City may assess/credit this amount to the customer's account and include this amount within the next billing cycle if sufficient proof is provided and approved by the City. 
(H)  All bills for water service delinquent as of July 15th of each year shall have a final written notice issued with full payment due by July 31st. At such time, the Director of Finance may certify such charges, together with a penalty of five percent (5%) thereon, to the County Auditor, who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges as penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(I)  Upon request of the customer for termination of service, the City shall make a final meter reading and shall render a final billing. Bills rendered upon such termination of service must be paid on or before the past due date indicated on the bill. Such bills may be increased by the reasonable cost of collection, which may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross amount due. 
(J)  In cases in which a meter cannot be read, whatever the cause, the City may require a payment equal to a representative charge for a period of similar length for service rendered to the same premises, or if that cannot be ascertained, then to similar premises. 
(K)  The payors of dishonored checks returned unpaid shall be charged twenty-five ($25.00) dollars to cover processing costs. 
(L)  Amounts of less than five dollars and one cent ($5.01) shall not be collected or refunded. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 11-18 . Passed 2-26-2018.) 
Sec. 931.02. - Rates for metered water service. 
(A)  The rates for metered water service shall be as follows: 
CITY OF MARYSVILLE WATER RATES 2013 Tier Monthly Usage 
(in ft 3 ) Rate Tier #1 First 200 (or any part thereof) $16.95 Tier #2 Next 1,360 $5.79 Tier #3 Over 1,500 $5.22 Tier #4 Next 2,000 $5.15 Tier #5 Next 2,000 $3.96 Tier #6 Over 7,000 $2.65 Minimum Charge $23.73 Effective January 1, 2014 Tier Monthly Usage (in ft 3 ) Rate Tier #1 First 200 (or any part thereof) $11.50 Tier #2 Next 1,300 $6.75 Tier #3 Next 48,500 $3.60 Tier #4 Over 50,000 $2.90 Minimum Charge $23.00 Note: Rates are calculated per 100 cubic feet or fraction thereof  
(B)  All properties within the City corporation limits that request manual meter reads (in lieu of the automatic meter reading) will be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee in addition to their monthly bill to cover the time to coordinate and perform this task. All properties outside the City corporation limits utilizing City Utilities will be charged a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee in addition to their monthly bill for this service. 
(C)  Minimum charges per month are established as follows: 
WATER MINIMUM BILLING - SECTION 931.02(C) Meter Size (inches) Meter Equivalents Water Allowed Per Month (Cubic Feet) Proposed Minimum Charge ?" 1.0 200 $23.00 1" 2.2 440 $39.20 11/2' 6.4 1,280 $95.90 2" 10.0 2,000 $128.75 3" 20.0 4,000 $200.75 4" 40.0 8,000 $344.75 6" 64.0 12,800 $517.55 8" 112 22,400 $863.15  
(D)  Per the Asset Purchase Agreement (dated December 19, 2005) between the City and Union County, all customers outside the City Corporation Limits will be assessed capacity fees and user rates greater than the water capacity fees and user fees charged for comparable customers located within the City of Marysville. 
(E)  Beginning January 1, 2015, the rate per 1,000 gallons sold shall be ten dollars ($10.00). For bulk water purchases utilizing a fire hydrant where a fire hydrant meter shall be required, there shall be a set-up fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for those customers unable to install the hydrant meter. 
(F)  For Bulk Water purchases utilizing a fire hydrant meter, there shall be a set-up fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for those customers unable to install the hydrant meter using the proper tools and supports. A deposit equivalent to the cost of the bulk water meter shall be made with the City prior to the setting of the meter. Any damage to the bulk meter will be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 93-14. Passed 12-4-2014; Ord. 60-18 . Passed 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 931.03. - Rates for private fire protection. 
The rates for private fire protection shall be as follows: 
(A)  Private Fire Protection is a standby service that the City makes available on demand. The City must be ready to provide adequate water quantities and pressures at all times throughout the distribution system. These fees compensate the City for the operation and maintenance (O&M) and capital costs for water treatment, supply maintenance, pumping, water tower storage, facility over-sizing and distribution capacity. 
Hose Connections and Hydrant Per Month Fee 11/4 hose connection $10.62 11/2 hose connection $13.55 2" hose connection $19.51 Private fire hydrants $38.92  
(B)  Automatic Sprinklers. 
Size of Connection (In.) Floor Space (Sq. Ft.) Per Month Fee 2 5,000 or less $19.51 3 7,500 or less $26.51 4 10,000 or less $33.91 6 20,000 or less $50.81 8 30,000 or less $70.49 10 40,000 or less $94.19 12 50,000 or less $117.59 16 70,000 or less $165.29 Additional floor space per 1,000 sq. ft $2.37  
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 931.04. - Multiple unit billing. 
(A)  Each service line shall be separately metered and no meter may be used to serve more than one (1) premises except in the instance when a special arrangement has been entered into by the City with an application for service to: 
(1)  A building or combination of buildings of the same ownership, housing two or more rental units each of which is designed or used as a single-family residence or by a person for professional or business purposes or both. 
(2)  A building housing two or more units, not of the same ownership, each of which is designed or used for single-family occupancy as a residence or by a person for professional or business purposes, or both, or a mobile home trailer park or court, of the same ownership containing pads, lots or locations for two or more mobile home or trailer units, not of the same ownership, each of which unit is designed or used for single-family occupancy or by a person for professional or business purposes, or both. 
(B)  Such special arrangement shall be entered into solely in the discretion of the City and shall provide for the metering of water service through one (1) or more meters to two (2) or more residential or professional business units, or combination thereof, per meter. The billing for water service shall be made to the applicant/owner or their heirs, successors or assigns, who shall be considered to be the customer of the City regardless of the ownership of the units provided with water service through such meter or meters. One billing shall be made with respect to each meter through which water service is provided pursuant to such special arrangement. The amounts of each such billing shall be determined on the basis of the "customer equivalents" provided by the meter employed. The customer equivalents utilized are those recommended by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) in Manual M6, Water Meters Selection, Installation, Testing & Maintenance. Such relationship is as follows: 
WATER METER EQUIVALENTS - SECTION 931.04 Meter Size (inches) Meter Equivalents ?" 1.0 1" 2.2 11/2" 6.4 2" 10.0 3" 20.0 4" 40.0 6" 64.0 8" 112 Note: The meter eauivalents for all meters larger than eight (8) inches will be calculated by the City based on actual meter capacity.  
(C)  To determine the amount of any periodic billing for water service pursuant to such a special arrangements: 
(1)  Multiple families or structures using a master meter or common service shall be based on the number of units utilizing the City's utility system. A vacant lot within a mobile home park is not considered a unit. 
(2)  When multiple businesses use the same water meter, each business shall be separately charged for water usage. 
(3)  Where existing service installations do not conform with the meter requirements under Chapter 930, the billing to the customer will be prorated based on the water consumption used. 
(D)  Mobile Home Park Vacant Lot Reporting. Prior to the first day of each month, the manager or his designee of a mobile home park shall file with the City Finance Department a report (on a form furnished by the Finance Department) of the number of vacant lots in the park. A vacant lot is one on which there is no home, trailer or structure. 
(E)  The filing of an erroneous report or the failure to timely file a report will result in a fee of $200.00, which will be assessed on the utility account of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 96-14. Passed 12-18-2014; Ord. 35-18 . Passed 4-23-2018; Ord. 60-18 . Passed 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 931.05. - Disconnection and reconnection of service. 
(A)  Water service may be shut off not less than seven (7) days after the City mails a disconnection notice informing the customer of the delinquent balance for any or all utility services provided by the City. Such services include, but are not limited to, water, sewer, stormwater, and refuse. A disconnection processing fee of $25.00 shall be applied if the customer has not paid in full the delinquent balance, provided it is greater than $30.00, by 5:00 p.m. on the due date set forth on the delinquency notice. 
(B)  All partial payments received shall be applied to the oldest outstanding utility balance. 
(C)  If a customer who has been disconnected for nonpayment of any or all utility service bills or for violation of, or failure to comply with, the regulations of the City, desires a reconnection, such reconnection may be made after the customer: 
(1)  Has paid all unpaid bills for all delinquent utility services owed to the City. 
(2)  Has paid a reconnection or turn-on fee as set forth on the City's rate schedule. 
(3)  Has corrected any condition in violation of the regulations of the City. 
(4)  Has made or maintained a deposit as required. 
(5)  Has made payment plan arrangements with the City in lieu of total payment. 
Violation of the payment terms in the payment plan arrangement previously approved by the City shall result in immediate disconnection without further notice. 
(D)  The disconnection processing fee and reconnection fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Disconnection process fee: $25.00 
(2)  Normal business hours (Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.): $25.00 (reconnection) 
(3)  After business hours, weekends or holidays: $50.00 (reconnection) 
(E)  The fees for voluntary disconnection and reconnection of service (for a period of more than seventy-two (72) hours) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Normal business hours: $25.00 (disconnection) 
(Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m.): $25.00 (reconnection) 
(2)  After business hours, weekends or: $50.00 (disconnection) 
Holidays: $50.00 (reconnection) 
(F)  When a customer's meter cannot be read for a period of thirty (30) days after the latest prior reading, the City may discontinue service to the customer upon giving seven (7) days written notice to them of its intention to do so, unless the customer shall promptly make access to the meter possible during the City's regular business hours on any day except Saturday, Sunday and holidays, and notify the City thereof. If the customer notifies the City that they can promptly make access to the meter possible only during a time and day other than during the City's regular business hours, the City shall make a charge for the actual cost of such meter reading service. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.; Ord. 23-14. Passed 5-8-2014; Ord. 71-14. Passed 10-23-2014.) 
Sec. 931.06. - Capacity fees, inspection charges and other fees. 
(A)  New Water Connections: The Water Capacity Fees shall be as follows: 
Meter Size (inches) Meter Equivalents Current Total ? 1.0 $4,950.00 1 2.2 $10,890.00 11/2" 6.4 $31,680.00 2" 10.0 $49,500.00 3" 20.0 $99,000.00 4" 40.0 $198,000.00 6" 64.0 $316,800.00 Note: The capacity fees for all meters larger than six (6) inches will be calculated by the City.  
The Water Capacity Fees for individual units contained in a multi-unit dwelling shall be assessed, regardless of meter size, based on a seven-tenths (0.7) customer equivalent. 
(B)  The Water Capacity Fees for fire service lines shall be fifteen percent (15%) of the rate for a normal water service. 
Fire Service Capacity Fees Meter Size (inches) AWWA Pipe Equivalents Current Total 1 2.5 $1,856.25 11/2 5.0 $3,712.50 2 8.0 $5,940.00 3 15.0 $11,137.50 4 25.0 $18,562.50 6 50.0 $37,125.00 8 80.0 $59,400.00 10 275.0 $205,187.50 12 400.0 $297,000.00 16 500.0 $371,250.00  
(C)  Inspection fees will be assessed at the rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per tap from the water main tap to the curb box and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) from the curb box to the building at the meter for single-family residences. Fees to review plans and inspect water connections for all other instances shall be in accordance with Section 1100.01. 
(D)  Charges will be assessed for all water users for water meters including the replacement of frozen or purposely damaged water meters. This assessment will include labor and materials to install meters and radio transmitters and will be based on the current price invoiced to the City by the manufacturer. 
(E)  Abandonment costs shall be paid by the applicant as follows: 
When in street or alley ..... $1,000.00 
Otherwise ..... $500.00 
(F)  In the event of demolition or destruction of a property by fire, conscious act or otherwise, lines shall be abandoned within ninety (90) days. Upon re-development, all previous connection charges paid to the City will be credited to the respective parcel. 
(G)  Reserved. 
(H)  Pursuant to the recent fire flow upgrades required for the Jerome Village development, developments (in excess of ten (10) Equivalent Residential Units (ERUs)) located downstream of the Fladt Road Water Tower and outside of the Jerome Village Authority District and customers located within the Authority District are subject to a water connection surcharge. This requirement is memorialized within the "First Amendment to and Amended and Restated Article Two of the Asset Purchase Agreement Dated December 19, 2005 between Union County and the City of Marysville" which shall control the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of this infrastructure. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 98-14. Passed 12-18-2014; Ord. 39-18 . Passed 6-25-2018.) 
Editor's note- Former subsection (G) hereof was repealed by Ordinance 45-15. 
Sec. 931.07. - Billing and service claims. 
(A)  Should a customer object to any bill and file a written objection, the City will accept payment of the net bill within seven (7) days after the customer has been notified of the results of the City's investigation made in response to the complaint. 
(1)  Should a customer question the accuracy of a meter in a billing dispute the meter will be removed for test. Such meters will be tested in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. In the event the meter so tested is found to have an error in registration, the advanced fee will be refunded or credited with and the bill corrected accordingly. The correction shall apply to both over and under registration. 
(2)  The customer shall, upon requesting a meter test, advance to the City a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for meters up to and including three-fourths inch (3/4") in size and at actual cost to the City (including time and materials) for all meters over three-fourths inch (3/4") in size. The advance charge will be refunded only if the meter fails to meet City specifications. 
(B)  Should a customer determine that the City's investigation of a billing or other water service dispute is not satisfactory, the customer shall file a written objection to the Board of Utility Claims to hear and resolve the billing dispute. Both the customer and the City may be present at the hearing to present details concerning the claim. The Board shall render a decision based on City ordinance and details of the claim. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 935. - UTILITY CLAIMS BOARD OF APPEALS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Sewers, Ch. 921, 925; Water, Chs. 930, 931. 

Sec. 935.01. - Established. 
A Utility Claims Board of Appeals is hereby established, consisting of two residents appointed by the President of Council with the advice and consent of Council and one member from the City administration, appointed by the Mayor. Initial appointments for residents of the City shall be those persons currently serving on the Review Board of Sewer and Sanitation Charge Claims with terms of office to be as set forth for the Review Board of Sewer and Sanitation Charge Claims. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
Sec. 935.02. - Powers. 
The Utility Claims Board of Appeals shall hear appeals from decisions made by the Director of Finance regarding claims for refunds for municipally owned utility charges when the method of measuring the service billed by the City does not accurately reflect the actual services provided or where services were not received, and to approve, disapprove or modify decisions regarding such charges as made by the Director of Finance. This Board shall also hear other claims against municipally owned utilities. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
Sec. 935.03. - Proof. 
The Utility Claims Board of Appeals may require proof of services not accurately billed or not received and may grant the applicant's claim for a refund as a credit to the account. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
Sec. 935.04. - City input. 
The Utility Claims Board of Appeals shall provide a copy of the appeal request to the Director of Finance, Director of Administration and the appropriate Supervisor for them to review. In the event any of the foregoing shall have comments on the application, that person shall appear at the hearing on the petition before the Appeals Board. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
Sec. 935.05. - Rules of procedure. 
The Utility Claims Board of Appeals may, from time to time, adopt and amend rules of procedure to assist in effecting the purposes of this chapter. A copy of such rules or amendments shall be filed with the Clerk prior to becoming effective. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
Sec. 935.06. - Appeal to council. 
The decisions of the Review Board shall be in writing and may be appealed to Council, provided an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Clerk of Council within thirty days after the final decision of the Appeals Board. 
(Ord. 28-91. Passed 5-23-1991.) 
CHAPTER 937. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, Ch. 938; illicit discharge and connection, Ch. 939. 

Sec. 937.01. - Organization of utility. 
The Stormwater Utility shall be administered by the City. The Stormwater Utility will hereafter be referred to as the Utility. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.02. - Responsibility. 
(A)  The City shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection and construction of all stormwater systems in the City. The City shall be responsible for the design of public stormwater systems in the City. The Utility shall inspect, operate and maintain the storm system as prescribed in Sections 937.05, 937.11, 937.15 and 937.16. For purposes of this Code, public stormwater drainage facilities begin at the grating or opening where water enters from a curb and gutter or swale, and ends at the outlet structure where water flows into a channel or natural watercourse. 
(B)  The Utility shall be responsible for controlling siltation and sedimentation that will adversely affect storm sewers, drainage ditches, watercourses and other drainage facilities or that will pollute public waters and watercourses. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.03. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.04. - Material specifications and construction. 
All storm sewers and drainage facilities, including materials and installation procedures, shall be constructed and designed in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.05. - Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems. 
(A)  The responsibility for operation and maintenance of all stormwater systems within the City is as follows: 
(1)  The Utility shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of public drainage facilities on public land and in street rights-of-way. 
(2)  The developer/owner shall be responsible for operation and maintenance associated with stormwater drainage facilities on private property. 
(3)  Where public facilities are in easements, the owner of the property is responsible for aesthetic maintenance such as lawn mowing, litter pickup, etc. The owner shall also ensure that no structures, plantings, dirt or debris interfere with the drainage facility's proper operation and maintenance in accordance with Section 521.05. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.06. - Land and facilities affected from outside the city. 
Where stormwater drains from lands outside the City, facilities within the City shall be designed in accordance with this Code as if the entire drainage area was within the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.07. - Rules and regulations. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  The City, shall be responsible for enforcement of the Stormwater Management Code and shall not allow any development of land area unless such development meets the design requirements herein. The City shall serve as the principal executive officer for stormwater management for the purposes of fulfilling the requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency's NPDES Phase II stormwater program. 
(2)  The Planning Commission shall not approve the final plat of any development or subdivision over which it has jurisdiction without certification from the City and the City Engineer, that such development or subdivision has been designed to be in full compliance with the design requirements herein, and all applicable stormwater pollution control standards required by the Ohio EPA under the NPDES Phase II Stormwater Program and as specified by the Ohio EPA in the Post Construction requirements of the State General Construction Permit. 
(B)  Design Standards and Stormwater Runoff Policy. 
(1)  All drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. The current rules and regulations are provided within the City of Marysville Stormwater Drainage Manual provided on the City's website (www.marysvilleohio.org). 
(2)  The United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service soil classification mapping of the City shall be used to determine soil classification for the purpose of all stormwater management design unless more detailed data is prepared by competent authority and reviewed and accepted by the City. 
(C)  Drainage Easements. 
(1)  An adequate utility easement conveyed to the City that provides access for personnel shall be required, along any tile, pipe, detention basin, drainage way, flood routing path, ditch, watercourse, natural stream, man-made stream, storm sewer or any other watercourse deemed necessary by the City which is not already within the street right-of-way. The easement shall be of sufficient width to allow cleaning, widening, deepening, replacing or other general maintenance of such drainage course or piped system. 
(2)  When it is necessary to convey stormwater outside the property lines of a proposed improved area in order to discharge into an adequate outlet, the Developer: 
(a)  Shall be responsible to obtain easements and/or maintenance agreements, in a form and substance satisfactory to the City, from abutting property owners, 
(b)  Shall remain responsible for maintenance agreements of such drainage course unless the easements and/or maintenance agreements require the abutting property owners to repair and maintain the drainage course satisfactorily. 
(3)  All drainage easements, preservation areas, reserves and other similar areas shall be shown on the "final engineering and construction plan(s)" Drainage easements for all on-site drainage system improvements shall be recorded for public use by final plat by the applicant. For off-site drainage systems improvements, easements should be recorded for public use by either final plat or separate instrument. The maintenance of such drainage easements shall be undertaken in the manner set forth in Section 937.05. 
(4)  Each purchaser of a lot for a single-family residence must be provided with a graphic depiction of all drainage easements, floodway routing, flood hazard areas, and other water-courses contained or designed into that lot. 
(5)  The City is hereby authorized to inspect such drainage easement areas. If the City determines that maintenance is needed, he/she shall notify the property owner whose property requires maintenance and/or any other parties who, in the sole determination of the City, directly benefit from such easement. The manner in which notice of the required maintenance, and the carrying out thereof, shall be as follows: 
(a)  The City shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner and/or any other parties benefiting from the easement notifying such parties that maintenance of the drainage course is necessary and that a contract with a contractor acceptable to the City for such repair and maintenance must be delivered to the City within fourteen (14) days of the notice. The notice will be served upon the property owner and/or benefited parties at the tax billing address for such premises reflected upon the records of the Union County Auditor. Service shall be accomplished by any means permitted for service of summons under the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. Each property affected by such notice shall also be posted with such notice by the City. 
(b)  In those instances where the address of the owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish a notice once a week in a newspaper of general circulation in Union County, Ohio setting forth the substance of the notice and time frame for compliance. The time frame for compliance shall be no less than fourteen (14) days after the publication. 
(c)  If the property owner and/or benefiting parties fail to comply with the notice, the City shall cause such repairs, replacement, maintenance and abatement procedures to be implemented as determined appropriate by the City. The cost of such repair, replacement, abatement and other procedures deemed appropriate by the City shall be immediately due and payable to the City in the amounts and in the proportions determined by the City. Additionally, the City may assess an administrative fee as the City deems appropriate against all benefiting property owners or benefiting parties in an amount not to exceed 10% of cost of such repair, replacement, abatement and other procedures, as determined by the City. Such cost shall be reimbursed to the City by all benefiting property owners or benefiting parties in an amount equally (or proportionally by area drained) apportioned amongst each respective property owner, for each instance where a notice is served under this section. The cost and administrative fee shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the same are assessed. 
(d)  Any fees or costs which remain unpaid for a period in excess of fifteen (15) days after the bill date shall be considered delinquent and subject to a five percent (5%) penalty for late payment. Delinquent accounts are subject to charges and penalties as set forth under Sections 937.20 and 937.21 
(e)  Any owner or benefiting party aggrieved by an action(s) of the City under this section may take an appeal to the Utility Claims Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date service of notice of such action upon the property owner and/or benefiting party. 
(D)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Exemptions are appropriate for certain land use activities which clearly do not generate significant increases in stormwater runoff. Where exemptions are granted under this Section, they shall apply to the requirements for runoff control only and do not imply a relaxation of requirements for adequate and proper on-site drainage or the ability of the system to accept runoff from tributary land. The following land uses and developments are exempted from stormwater runoff controls: 
(a)  Land preparation for agricultural crops, orchards, woodlots, sod farms, and nursery operations. 
(b)  Land grading or leveling for erosion control under direction of the local soils conservation district, or other government agencies that are charged with responsibility for environmental protection. 
(c)  Land developments with a combined area of less than one acre. 
(d)  Single family residential developments that are a portion of a subdivision originally consisting of one or more acres and where the area of the remaining undeveloped or not permanently stabilized lots is less than one acre. 
(e)  Multi-family residential or commercial developments which total less than one acre. 
(f)  Redevelopment of existing buildings, their related parking lots, and structures where less than one acres is to be altered by grading, draining, removing existing ground cover, or paving; and of which one acre or less will be impervious areas, such as roofs, walks, and parking areas, when redevelopment is completed. 
(g)  Situations where existing and adequate off-site stormwater runoff control facilities provide the required control. However, this shall not be construed to imply the first development requesting use shall have full use of available capacity. Rather, such exemption shall be calculated based on a proportional use of available storage capacity to ensure that later developments have a similar opportunity to utilize a portion of the storage capacity. 
(E)  Stormwater Runoff Control Criteria. 
(1)  Quantitative Control. All drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the City of Marysville. The current rules and regulations are provided within the City of Marysville Stormwater Drainage Manual provided on the City's website (www.marysvilleohio.org). 
(2)  Qualitative Control. Stormwater quality control shall be implemented into sites within developing areas in accordance with the general and specific requirements outlined in the Ohio EPA-issued General Permit for Stormwater Discharges associated with Construction Activity (OEPA Permit No. OHC000003, Part IIIG.2.e), or any subsequent OEPA-issued revision. 
(F)  Stormwater System Design. Stormwater drainage and management facilities including underground pipes, inlets, culverts, catch basins, and retention or detention basins shall meet the design requirements specified in the Construction and Material Specifications and City Stormwater Drainage Manual. 
(G)  Routine and Remedial Maintenance. The City will provide for inspection and routine maintenance of storm drainage facilities that have been accepted for maintenance by the City. A maintenance agreement policy for all privately held stormwater management facilities must be submitted to the City, and recorded as a restrictive covenant on the property deed for that facility prior to review and approval of the site development plans by the City. City maintenance may include stormwater conveyance-related structure cleaning and repair. For other storm drainage facilities not accepted for maintenance by the City, the City may provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to public health and safety, through the abatement procedures described in Section I, below. For the purposes of this Policy, maintenance associated with privately owned retention/detention basins including, but not limited to, mowing, rivulet repair, basin bottom fill, seeding, fertilizing and/or algae removal, are neither considered "potentially hazardous" to the public nor are they considered "severe" stormwater problems, and maintenance will not be provided by the City except in case of public emergency as determined by the City. 
(H)  Drainage Corrections. 
(1)  Notice to Correct Drainage. 
(a)  When the City finds that a tract of land is inadequately drained or that there is an obstruction to a culvert, covered drain, or other natural or man-made watercourse that interferes with water naturally flowing therein or that such culvert, drain or watercourse is of insufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate the flow of water; or that a condition which alters, impairs, reduces, restricts or otherwise damages any part of the stormwater system or which may do so in the event of a severe rainstorm constitutes a public hazard or nuisance, the City shall notify the owner or person having possession, charge or management of such land to remove the obstruction or provide the necessary drainage. Such notice shall be served on such persons by personal delivery, by mail at the last known place of residence or by posting on the premises. 
(b)  The owner must comply with the orders of the City within the time specified, not to exceed ten (10) days. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute an unlawful act. Each and every day thereafter during which the owner fails to carry out the order of the City shall constitute a separate offense as specified in Section 937.99. 
(2)  Emergencies and Abatement. In case of an emergency, the City may direct that action be taken immediately to correct the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The Utility may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. 
(3)  Notice. 
(a)  In any case, where a condition described in Section 937.07(I) exists for more than ten (10) days, the City shall serve written notice on the property owner directing the owner within a specified period of time, to fill or drain such land, remove any obstruction; and, if necessary, enlarge the culverts, drains or watercourse to meet the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  After service of notice or after publication in a paper of general circulation in the City for two (2) consecutive weeks, the owner, or their agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the City's notice within the time therein specified. In the event an owner fails or refuses to comply with the City's notice, the City may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. If the owner is more than thirty (30) days delinquent in payment after notice, provisions in 937.99 shall apply. 
(c)  Owners of real property in the City consent to the entry of City employees or their agents, upon any real property in the City, for all reasonable times during normal business hours for the purpose of inspection, repair or maintenance required by this policy. 
(d)  Non-action by the City to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of a permit or zoning change shall not relieve the owner or person having possession, charge or management of such land from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the City, its officers or agents being responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom. 
(e)  Nothing in this policy shall be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of this policy shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. 
(4)  Abatement Costs. The City shall account for all costs associated with an emergency or abatement including, but not limited to, administration, notification, inspection, serving of papers or documents, legal counsel, force account labor, enforcement, operational services and outside contracted services. These costs shall be added to the owner's stormwater drainage service charge. 
(5)  Penalty. This section shall not be construed to relieve the owner of any penalties prescribed by Section 937.99. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.08. - Cooperation with federal, state and other agencies and political subdivisions. 
The City, upon the recommendation of the Mayor and approval by Council, may enter into agreements with other political subdivisions including the Cities, County, State of Ohio, federal government and other agencies having power to regulate stormwater as provided by law where required. The City shall have the right to enter into agreements to make drainage improvements, where required, and as provided by law. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.09. - National flood insurance program. 
The Utility shall assist the City in the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program, pursuant to Chapter 1313 Flood Damage Prevention Code. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.10. - Permits process. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, relocate, or demolish a storm sewer, natural watercourse or other drainage facilities without first obtaining a proper permit from the City and paying the prescribed fee. 
(B)  Permits are required for the following improvement categories: 
(1)  Connection into the public stormwater system. 
(2)  Improvements which are or will become public facilities. 
(3)  Improvements within dedicated but unimproved street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Improvements which require retention or detention facilities. 
(C)  An application shall be made by the owner of the property involved or their authorized agent employed in connection with the proposed work. 
(D)  A permit shall expire by limitation when no work is started within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. However, one (1) renewal, which shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days commencing upon expiration of the original permit, shall be granted upon written application made prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.11. - Plan review process. 
(A)  Plans for improvements made within the City that require stormwater drainage facilities and/or changes or alterations to existing stormwater drainage facilities must be submitted to the City for review and approval. Plans and applications may be submitted directly to the Utility or through the Development permit process. All drainage improvements must be in compliance with Chapter 1313 Flood Damage Prevention Code. The City shall have thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of application to review each plan submitted. Plans that are not approved must be resubmitted after revisions are made. No permit shall be issued until a plan is approved, or the need for a permit is waived, by the City. 
(B)  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by five (5) sets of plans and two (2) sets of specifications. In addition to the plans and specifications, the applicant shall provide all statements, calculations, drawings and other supporting data regarding the manner in which stormwater runoff from the project site on the proposed development area will be controlled. 
(C)  Every improvement shall be provided with a stormwater system capable of handling stormwater flowing onto the improvement site from other areas as well as stormwater from the site itself. The drainage system shall be designed to discharge into an adequate drainage outlet facility without producing any adverse effect on adjacent or downstream properties. 
(D)  A storm drainage facility shall be constructed when the stormwater flow from the tributary area, as determined by the City, is a hazard to adjoining property. 
(E)  The stormwater drainage system shall not be combined with any part of the wastewater system, nor shall wastewater be discharged thereto. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.12. - Permit review. 
It shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer and the City to examine the application as described in the plan review process. If the examination reveals no objections to the proposed plan and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with codes, laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work will be in conformance with this Code, the application shall be approved and a permit issued, as soon as practicable. If the examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the findings shall be communicated in writing to the applicant. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.13. - Permit fees. 
The owner/developer shall pay a permit fee and an inspection fee as for all stormwater facilities to be constructed. These fees shall be as defined in Chapter 1100 in this code. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.14. - Permit revoked. 
(A)  The City may revoke the permit or stop work for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When there is a violation of any provision of this Code, any ordinance of the City or statute of the State relating to the project. 
(2)  When the continuance of any work becomes dangerous to life or property. 
(3)  When there is a violation of any condition on which the issuance of the permit was based. 
(4)  When any false statement or misrepresentation has been made upon the application, plans or specifications on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
(5)  When work is discontinued for a period of one (1) year or when, in the opinion of the City, the completion of the work has been unduly delayed. 
(B)  No revoked permit may be reissued until the plans and uncompleted work are made to comply with all the requirements of all laws, codes, regulations and ordinances then in effect. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.15. - Inspection and surveillance. 
(A)  After an application is approved and a permit is issued, construction can begin. It shall be the responsibility of the City to inspect (or designate others to inspect) the premises for which permits have been issued. 
(B)  When the City finds the drainage facility, or the construction thereof, is contrary to the approved plans, or presents an unsafe or dangerous condition in connection with the provisions of this Code or of any law or ordinance relating to the same subject matter, the City shall give written notice to the owner of the premises or the contractor responsible for the work. The notice shall state where and in what respect the work does not conform to the approved plans, or state the defective condition and law violated, and shall specify a reasonable period of time in which to conform to the plans or the Code. 
(C)  Notice, as required by this provision, is to be served on the owner and permitee, agent, contractor or other person responsible for the work or violation related to this Code, by personal delivery or by certified mail addressed to their last known place of residence or place of business. If the owner and permitee, agent or contractor fails to comply with said notice within the time period specified, such failure shall result in a revocation of the permit. 
(D)  In every instance, a revocation notice of the permit shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner and permitee, their agent or the person having charge of the work. A revocation notice shall also be posted alongside the permit. After the notice is received or posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with any operation for which such permit was issued. No part of the fees for such permit shall be returned. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.16. - Right of entry for survey and examination. 
(A)  The employees of the Utility, or its agents including contractors and their employees, consultants and their employees, may enter upon lands within the City to make surveys and examinations to accomplish the necessary preliminary findings to establish a Master Plan and for detailed analysis to prepare final plans and specifications for the proposed improvements. 
(B)  Where improvements are made that require periodic maintenance or inspection upon the lands by the Utility, the owner of such lands must grant the City a perpetual easement and right of entry around and access to any stormwater channel or facility, including storm sewers. 
(C)  Where improvements are required upon lands, the owner of such lands must grant the City a temporary right of entry for construction and specification purposes where required. This consent shall provide the City with the right of access only during the period of construction. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.17. - Stormwater enterprise fund. 
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the Utility including stormwater drainage service charges, permit and inspection fees, direct charges and interest earnings shall be deposited in the Stormwater Fund, hereby created, and used exclusively for carrying out the purpose of Chapter 937. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.18. - Establishment of storm drainage service charges. 
(A)  Application. A stormwater drainage service charge is imposed on each and every lot or parcel of land within the City and on the owner thereof, excepting only public streets, boulevards, alleys, viaducts, sidewalks, curbing, street crossings, grade separations, public airport runways and taxiways, and other public ways, highway structures and appurtenances belonging to the City. 
(1)  Road and freeway rights-of-way shall be exempted from the stormwater drainage service charge because they function as part of the stormwater collection and conveyance system. Railroads and other rights-of-way will be charged as described herein. 
(2)  Properties that have existing stormwater detention facilities, or those planning such facilities, may have their stormwater drainage service charges reduced as determined by the City. The detention facilities must be in accordance with the hydrologic, hydraulic and structural design requirements of the rules and regulations developed by the Utility under Section 937.07. Facilities of a temporary nature will not be allowed a decrease in their charges. 
(B)  Monthly Charge per Equivalent Runoff/Residential Unit (ERU). Bills for stormwater service shall be rendered monthly. The monthly charge per ERU shall be as established below. One ERU is equivalent to 2,700 square feet. The monthly charge per ERU shall be reviewed annually beginning in 2005 and adjusted to meet the Utility's budget for the next five year's operations and capital improvements. Any increase to the ERU charge noted below shall be approved by Council. 
(C)  Schedule of Fees. Each single family property shall be billed as (1) ERU. All non-single-family property owners' bills shall be based on impervious area. Effective January 1, 2015, one (1) ERU Value shall be billed at $3.25 per month. Effective January 1, 2016, one (1) ERU Value shall be billed at $3.75 per month. Effective January 1, 2019, one (1) ERU Value shall be billed at $4.50 per month. Effective January 1, 2020, one (1) ERU Value shall be billed at $5.25 per month. Effective January 1, 2021, one (1) ERU Value shall be billed at $6.00 per month. 
(D)  Continuance of Fee Structure. The maximum ERU permitted under this section shall never exceed the equivalent of 2,700 square feet and the billing per month shall never be less than three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3.25) for the time period of January 1-December 31, 2015 and three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75) beginning January 1, 2016 and four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) beginning January 1, 2019 and five dollars and twenty-five cents ($5.25) beginning January 1, 2020 and six dollars ($6.00) beginning January 1, 2021. 
(Ord. 22-14. Passed 5-8-2014; Ord. 78-14. Passed 11-20-2014; Ord. 67-18 . Passed 11-26-2018.) 
Sec. 937.19. - Collection of stormwater drainage service charge. 
The stormwater drainage service charge shall be paid by the owner of each lot or parcel which is subject to this charge when billed. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.20. - Delinquent charges. 
Each bill for Stormwater service remaining unpaid fifteen (15) days after the bill date shall become delinquent and subject to a five percent (5%) penalty for late payment. Should the past due date of a bill coincide with a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, it will automatically be extended to the first full business day following. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.21. - County certification. 
All bills for Stormwater delinquent as of August 15 of each year shall have a final written notice issued with full payment due by August 31. Delinquent accounts after such final notice shall be forwarded to the County Auditor who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate of the owner's property and collect such charges and penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.22. - Stormwater credit. 
(A)  Credits will be given to non-single family properties for reducing peak flow of runoff from a property using stormwater detention or retention or by providing maintenance on the part of the public, open channel stormwater systems passing through the property. 
(B)  In order to receive credits, property owners must complete an application packet. In order to receive certain levels of credit, a registered professional engineer must perform engineering calculations. The City will institute the credit, if applicable, after reviewing the application packet. Details of the credit program and all applications shall be contained in the stormwater credit manual. The Credit Manual and application forms are available from the City and on the City of Marysville website. 
(C)  A minimum peak flow credit of twenty-five percent (25%) can be obtained by having a stormwater detention facility that meets City standards and functions as designed. A peak flow credit of up to fifty percent (50%) can be obtained by providing an engineering analysis. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.23. - Appeals. 
The Utility Claims Board of Appeals, as set forth in Chapter 935 of the Codified Ordinances, shall hear appeals. A property owner may appeal a decision made by an agent of the City of Marysville, pursuant to this chapter, by sending a notice of appeal to the Utility Claims Board of Appeals, 125 E. 6th Street, Marysville, Ohio 43040, within ten (10) days of receiving the decision. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 937.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person being the owner, agent, or having control of the premises, architect, engineer, contractor, builder, subcontractor, foreman, mechanic, employee, or any other person who pleads guilty or is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this Code, or of any certificate, order, or permit issued thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day on which such person continues to violate the provisions of this Code, after having once been notified of such violation, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(B)  The imposition of any fine or penalty pursuant to this policy shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting any appropriate legal proceeding and pursuing any and all available legal remedies in a Court of proper jurisdiction to correct or abate a violation, require compliance with this policy or other applicable chapters, ordinances, regulations or rules of the City or State of Ohio as determined to be appropriate by the City Attorney. Fines or penalties delinquent for more than thirty (30) days after the final notice shall be forwarded to the County Auditor who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges and penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 938. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, Ch. 938; illicit discharge and connection, Ch. 939. 

Sec. 938.01. - Purpose. 
This chapter will promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.02. - Definitions. 
For definitions see 900.01. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.03. - Permits. 
(A)  No person shall be granted a Zoning permit for land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of 10,000 or more square feet without an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan approved by the City of Marysville. 
(B)  No Zoning permit is required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(C)  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(D)  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A supervisor for the contractor, knowledgeable in the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, shall be on site on all days when construction or grading activity takes place. 
(E)  Permit reviews shall be conducted as set forth in Section 937.12. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.04. - Plan requirements. 
(A)  The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the following: 
(1)  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this code. Scale of the map shall be no smaller than 1"=100', unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer. 
(2)  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(3)  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
(4)  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
(5)  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance. 
(B)  Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved by the City Engineer in written authorization to the permittee, and shall include: 
(1)  Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan submitted to the City Engineer; 
(2)  Field modifications of a minor nature. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.05. - Design requirements. 
(A)  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the Construction and Material Specifications. The design shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of City Engineer. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by City Engineer to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
(B)  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(C)  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by City Engineer. 
(D)  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
(1)  Soil stabilization shall be completed within five days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
(2)  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two weeks or the City Engineer may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed. 
(3)  Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the Construction and Material Specifications on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
(4)  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered within 7 days if they will be dormant for more than 21 days but less than one year, and not within surface waters of the State. 
(5)  The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season. 
(6)  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
(7)  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
(E)  Sediment controls requirements shall include: 
(1)  Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls. 
(2)  Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long term stormwater management, if required by the City Engineer. 
(3)  Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
(F)  Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
(1)  If a stream will be crossed regularly during construction, the temporary stream crossing shall be approved by the City Engineer and installation must comply with the Construction and Material Specifications. 
(2)  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work until final acceptance by the City Engineer. 
(3)  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to the criteria outlined in Construction and Material Specifications. 
(4)  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels 
(G)  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
(1)  A temporary access road provided at all sites. 
(2)  Other measures required by City Engineer in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.06. - Inspection. 
(A)  The City Engineer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the approval of the City Engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least three business days before the following: 
(1)  Start of construction, including installation of sediment and erosion control measures. 
(2)  Completion of site clearing. 
(3)  Completion of rough grading. 
(4)  Completion of final grading. 
(5)  Close of the construction season. 
(6)  Completion of final landscaping. 
(B)  The permittee or his/her designee shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form, and made available upon request of the City Engineer. 
(C)  The City Engineer shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under subsection (B) hereof. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.07. - Performance. 
(A)  Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event that any person holding a Zoning Permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, City Engineer may suspend or revoke the Zoning Permit. 
(B)  Violation. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 938.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person being the owner, agent, or having control of the premises, architect, engineer, contractor, builder, subcontractor, foreman, mechanic, employee, or any other person who pleads guilty or is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this Code, or of any certificate, order, or permit issued thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day on which such person continues to violate the provisions of this Code, after having once been notified of such violation, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(B)  The imposition of any fine or penalty pursuant to this policy shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting any appropriate legal proceeding and pursuing any and all available legal remedies in a Court of proper jurisdiction to correct or abate a violation, require compliance with this policy or other applicable chapters, ordinances, regulations or rules of the City or State of Ohio as determined to be appropriate by the City Attorney. 
(C)  Fines or penalties delinquent for more than thirty (30) days after the final notice shall be forwarded to the County Auditor who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges and penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 6-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
CHAPTER 939. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, Ch. 938; illicit discharge and connection, Ch. 939. 

Sec. 939.01. - Purpose/intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of The City of Marysville through the regulation of illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process as required by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA). The objectives of this chapter are: 
(A)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges. 
(B)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4. 
(C)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.02. - Definitions. 
Refer to Section 900.01 for definitions. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.03. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City Engineer and approved by the Public Service Director. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.04. - Responsibility for administration. 
The City Engineer and the Public Service Director shall work together to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City Engineer or the Public Service Director may be delegated in writing by the City Engineer or the Public Service Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.05. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.06. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.07. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.08. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(A)  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: 
(1)  Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 
(2)  Discharges or flow from firefighting. 
(3)  Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity requires a verbal notification to the City Engineer prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  Discharges from off lot household sewage treatment systems permitted by the Union County Board of Health for the purpose of discharging treated sewage effluent, in accordance with Ohio Administrative Code 3701-29-02(6), until such time as the Ohio EPA issues a NPDES permitting mechanism for residential 1, 2, 3 family dwellings. These discharges are exempt unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a public nuisance by the Union County Board of Health. When NPDES permit coverage is available, discharges will no longer be exempt until an appropriate NPDES permit has been issued and approved by the Ohio EPA. 
(5)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(6)  Other discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(B)  Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(4)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, as necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City Engineer. 
(5)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City Engineer requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.09. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.10. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
(Submission of NOI) 
(A)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City Engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(B)  The owner or operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to the City Engineer at the same time the operator submits the original Notice of Intent to the OEPA as applicable. 
(C)  The copy of the Notice of Intent may be delivered to the City Engineer either in person or by mailing it to: 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water 
City Engineer 
125 East Sixth Street 
Marysville, Ohio 43040 
(D)  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the Notice of Intent to do so to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.11. - Compliance monitoring. 
(A)  Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The City Engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(1)  If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City Engineer. 
(2)  Facility owners and operators shall allow the City Engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The City Engineer shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City Engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(4)  The City Engineer has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the City Engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Engineer access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the owner or operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the City Engineer reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
(B)  Search Warrants. If the City Engineer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the City Engineer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.12. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of best management practices (BMP). 
City Engineer will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.13. - Notification of spills. 
(A)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City Engineer no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City Engineer within two (2) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years. 
(B)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.14. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(A)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City Engineer is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City Engineer is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in 939.17. 
(B)  Warning Notice. When the City Engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the City Engineer may serve upon that person a written Warning Notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the Warning Notice will in no way relieve the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Warning Notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the City Engineer to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Warning Notice. 
(C)  Notice of Violation. Whenever the City Engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the City Engineer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
The Notice of Violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Utility Claims Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of service of notice of violation; and 
(7)  A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(D)  Compensatory Action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the City Engineer may impose alternative compensatory actions upon a violator, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(E)  Suspension Of MS4 Access. 
(1)  Emergency Cease and Desist Orders. When the City Engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the City Engineer may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this Subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the City Engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The City Engineer may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City Engineer within ten (10) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(2)  Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The City Engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City Engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(3)  Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. 
(a)  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City Engineer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City Administrator for a reconsideration. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City Engineer. 
(F)  Civil Penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within fourteen (14) days, or such greater period as the City Engineer shall deem appropriate, after the City Engineer has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Engineer may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(G)  Criminal Prosecution. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.15. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the City Engineer. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Utility Claims Board of Appeals shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Utility Claims Board of Appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.16. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fourteen (14) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the City Engineer, then representatives of the City Engineer shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.17. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days. Delinquent accounts after such final notice shall be forwarded to the County Auditor who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate of the owner's property and collect such charges and penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.18. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
Sec. 939.19. - Remedies not exclusive. 
(A)  The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City Engineer to seek cumulative remedies. 
(B)  The City Engineer may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. 7-10. Passed 2-11-2010.) 
TITLE FIVE - PUBLIC SERVICES 
CHAPTER 941. - CEMETERY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Burials may be prohibited, ORC 759.05; management and control, ORC 759.09; Cemetery Endowment Fund, ORC 759.12, 759.15; burial permits, ORC 3705.24 et seq.; burial of indigent persons, ORC 5113.15. 

Sec. 941.01. - Oakdale Cemetery. 
Statement of Purpose. The City of Marysville recognizes its responsibility to protect and enhance the grounds of Oakdale Cemetery. The obligation to facilitate the interment process with respect and to assure the proper care of these sacred grounds by adherence to the highest maintenance standards is acknowledged. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.02. - Oakdale Cemetery hours. 
(A)  Working and Visiting Hours. 
(1)  Working hours shall be 7:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. daily, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(2)  Visiting hours shall be 7:30 a.m. to sunset every day. Visiting at any other time shall be considered trespassing. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.03. - St. John's Catholic Cemetery. 
(A)  City Services Provided. 
(1)  The City shall provide for the opening and closing of gravesites, the installation of foundations and disinterment services for St. John's Catholic Cemetery upon the following conditions. 
(2)  Orders for interments, disinterments and foundations shall follow the same regulations as for Oakdale Cemetery. The City shall not provide any services on Sundays or holidays. 
(3)  The City shall be paid the required fee as charged by Oakdale Cemetery for any service performed. St. John's Catholic Cemetery shall be responsible for the collection and payment of all fees owed to the City. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.04. - Cemetery rates. 
(A) Purchase of Lots. (1) Section Body Lot Residents Non-Residents Older & K 2 $700.00 $1,400.00 M&O 2 $800.00 $1,600.00 P&Q 2 $1000.00 $2,000.00 (2) Section Body Lot Residents Non-Residents Older, K, M, O 1 $300.00 $600.00 P&Q 1 $500.00 $1,000.00 (3) Section Body Lot Residents Non-Residents O Infant $100.00 $400.00  
(4)  A one-time land acquisition charge of ten percent (10%) is included in the lot charges listed in subsection (A)(1) and (2) above. 
(5)  The land acquisition charge is intended to assist in the future purchase of property with the intention to expand the cemetery when warranted. 
(B)  Interments are prohibited on Sundays and City holidays, including but not limited to New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, President's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, The Friday after Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. If the holiday falls on a Saturday, the Friday before will be holiday. If the holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday will be the holiday. Funerals must in the Cemetery by 3:00 p.m. on weekdays and 12:00 noon on Saturdays or there will be an extra fee added to the regular fee. The extra fee will be: $50.00 for the first fifteen minutes past 4:00 p.m. on weekdays and 12:00 noon on Saturdays plus $25.00 for each fifteen minutes thereafter. 
(C)  Opening and Closing. 
Weekday Saturday Standard vault grave $400.00 $550.00 Infant grave $225.00 $275.00 Cremation $175.00 $225.00 Disinterment (Infant or Cremation) Same as above for each opening Disinterment (Standard Grave) $950.00 $1,250.00  
(D)  Foundations, Monuments and Markers 
(1)  Size of marker: 
(a)  Minimum charge (300 sq. in. and under) ..... $150.00 
(b)  All larger sizes (over 300 sq. in.) ..... $0.55 per sq. in. 
(2)  The length of monuments and markers shall not exceed three-fourths of the width of the lot upon which they are centered. Monuments or markers shall not exceed forty-eight inches above the base. Bases shall not exceed twelve inches in height. Reference all provisions of 941.06(F) 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.05. - Installment purchases. 
(A)  Lots Purchased by Installments Shall Require : 
(1)  An initial payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per gravesite. 
(2)  Then twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per gravesite per month until the purchase price is paid in full. 
(3)  The purchaser may not place anything on the lot, nor may interment be made until the purchase price is paid in full. 
(4)  Purchasers of cemetery lots by installment shall keep their accounts current. Any account not current within sixty (60) days of notification shall have the purchase agreement forfeited. 
(5)  If the purchase agreement is forfeited, the total amount received less fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be refunded and the gravesite made available for resale to the public. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.06. - Rules and regulations. 
(A)  Definitions. 
(1)  Cemetery means a burial place for the human dead, only. 
(2)  Lot, plot, gravesite or burial space shall be used interchangeably, and means one, or more than one, adjoining graves. 
(3)  Interment means the disposition of the remains of a deceased person or persons by entombment or burial 
(4)  Memorial includes a monument, marker, tablet, private mausoleum or tomb for family, individual use, tombstone, or burial vault. 
(5)  Endowment means a specified amount of money set aside by the lot owner with only interest used, not principal, and given to Oakdale Cemetery for services rendered on such lot. No specific instructions go with the same. On the effective date of this revised ordinance, no new endowments will be accepted by Oakdale Cemetery. 
(6)  Special endowment means a specific sum of money placed in trust by lot owners with Oakdale Cemetery with only the interest on the investment to be used as the donor so desires. Only the Superintendent carries out the specific terms. On the effective date of this revised ordinance, no new special endowments will be accepted by Oakdale Cemetery. 
(7)  Resident means any person who either lives or works in the City of Marysville. 
(B)  Care of Lots. 
(1)  Under no circumstances shall a lot be terraced above or below surrounding or adjoining lots. 
(2)  To keep all lot owners harmonious as possible without infringing on an adjoining lot, ALL plantings shall be under the supervision of the cemetery personnel. 
(3)  Flower beds may be made the full length of the monument on the lot at the head of grave only and twelve (12) inches out from the monument toward the burial spaces. No planting is allowed on the backside or sides of the monument. Cemetery personnel will remove plantings not meeting these requirements. 
(4)  The use of decorative gravel and/or stone, lava rock or like material is not permitted. 
(5)  No chairs, statues, artificial animals, settees, jars, boxes, shells, toys, bottles or glass containers, used as a receptacle, nor battery operated or electrified devices or any other inappropriate items shall be placed on gravesites. The cemetery personnel shall remove all such articles that violate this rule. 
(6)  Artificial flowers shall be permitted all year, with the exception that grave blankets will be removed by February 1st to prevent damage to grass. Artificial flowers should be attached to the monument or within the twelve inch space in front of the monument or placed in the urn(s). Artificial flowers which are severely weathered or are out-of-season, shall be removed by Cemetery personnel, labeled with the date removed, the name on the grave from which they were removed, stored by the shop for four months to allow family members the opportunity to claim them and then disposed of. 
(7)  Oakdale Cemetery shall not be responsible for any tools or other personal property, unattended by its owner. 
(8)  All urns or vases shall be removed from a lot if not in use by June 1st, or if they are showing significant signs of deterioration or are causing problems in mowing, unless they are an integral part of the monument. Items removed shall be labeled with the date removed, the name on the grave from which they were removed, stored by the shop for four months to allow family members the opportunity to claim them and then disposed of. Urns and vases may be made of concrete, metal, plastic or other material. 
(9)  No trees, plants or shrubs, shall be planted on lots or graves. 
(10)  If any existing tree, plant, or shrub on any lot becomes detrimental or injurious to adjacent lots, walks, avenues or monuments, it shall be removed. 
(11)  The use of "shepherd's rods" for hanging baskets, containing live or artificial flowers, are allowed, with the requirements that they be flush against the monument with the basket hanging over the monument and/or the 12 inch space in front of the monument, to make it easy to mow around. The height shall not exceed 60 inches from the ground. Ornamental objects hanging from the shepherd's rods are prohibited. "Shepherd's rods" which are not in use after June 1st shall be removed and shall be labeled with the date removed, the name on the grave from which they were removed, stored by the shop for four months to allow family members the opportunity to claim them and then disposed of. 
(12)  Oakdale Cemetery reserves the right to remove any or all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs or plants of any kind. 
(13)  Any article made of concrete is not considered ornamental and is strictly forbidden. 
(C)  Lots. 
(1)  Persons desiring to purchase a lot shall go to the cemetery office, where records shall be kept, and the Superintendent or his assistant shall show the lots that are available and for sale. 
(2)  Each individual section is subdivided into lots of different sizes, so as to meet the various needs of purchasers. 
(3)  No lots shall be sold in any section until the same has been properly graded, landscaped, seeded, drained, water service installed and platted and is approved by Council. 
(4)  Prices of all lots are fixed by Council and cannot be altered, in any circumstance. 
(5)  Lots are conveyed by deed, for purposes of interment only. Lots are transferable by owners relinquishing the original deed to the cemetery. 
(6)  Cemetery personnel shall mark all lots by cornerstones, numbered to correspond with the deed, record and plat book, and set as level as possible with the sod. 
(7)  No curbing, fencing, hedging, borders or enclosures, or other boundary markings shall be permitted on any lot. The cemetery reserves the right to remove the same if erected, planted or placed. 
(8)  Purchased lots are exempt from taxation and liabilities for debts. 
(9)  No lot owner has the right to transfer any lot, in whole or part, for profit or other similar devices. 
(10)  The lot owner may dispose of an unused portion of a lot in a legal will or notarized statement. One copy shall be delivered to the cemetery office in order that it may be recorded. 
(11)  As a husband is not always an heir-at law of his wife, nor wife of her husband, neither shall necessarily inherit the lot from the other. To assure the survivor an interest in the lot, both named should be embraced in the deed. If the proprietor died testate, the lot shall descend to his or her heirs jointly and in equal, undivided shares, subject to the same conditions. The heirs shall be determined by the statutes of Ohio, in force at time of death. 
(12)  Persons purchasing a lot may not place anything on the lot, until all of the purchase price is paid in full. 
(13)  Any purchaser desiring to return an entire lot or unused portion, may do so by bringing or mailing his or her certificate to the City of Marysville, where they will be reimbursed for the exact amount paid, less a service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) per deed. 
(14)  The taking of plants, shrubs, trees or flowers from another's lot or grave is strictly forbidden. 
(15)  The number of interments which may be properly made upon a lot is definitely fixed at the time of purchase, and no more shall be permitted. 
(16)  The remains of the original lot owner shall stay on the original lot. Other remains may be removed from one lot to another, with legal consent by the closest, living legal heir(s) and then only for good cause, according to the aforesaid rules. 
(D)  Interments. 
(1)  All interment charges shall be paid in advance, or guaranteed by the Funeral Director, personally. 
(2)  Interments in one grave space are limited to either one body (casket), one body plus two cremations, or a total of three cremations. One body and an infant in a mother's or father's arms can be included in one casket. 
(3)  All interments shall be made in concrete, metal or sectional vaults (approved) or plastic. No wooden boxes, except for children two years of age or under, may be used. 
(4)  All interments are subject to local, County and State laws. 
(5)  Errors may be corrected. If, at any time, a misinterment is made, the Superintendent shall have the error corrected as soon as humanly possible. 
(6)  Parties are advised to apply at the cemetery office before fixing the time for the funeral, to ascertain at what time the Superintendent can attend to the same, in order to prevent delay and confusion at the grounds. Applications will be considered each in its own turn. 
(7)  All interments shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent and by the employees of the cemetery. 
(8)  No body shall be removed from the grounds, nor shall a body be removed from one part of the cemetery to another, without permission of the Superintendent and such removal shall be made by cemetery employees, under his supervision. 
(9)  The cemetery requires that all interments are settled solid before sodding. 
(10)  The arrangement of the location of graves upon a lot is determined by the Superintendent, as it is necessary that uniformity prevail. 
(11)  No interments shall be made without a burial permit furnished by the Funeral Director and delivered to the Superintendent before disposition of the body concerned. 
(12)  Orders for interments shall reach the Cemetery office forty-eight hours preceding the interment, except infants two (2) years or younger shall require twenty-four hour notification. For all Monday services, the order shall reach the Cemetery office by 12:00 noon on the preceding Friday. 
(13)  Funerals must be in the Cemetery by 3:00 p.m. on weekdays and 12:00 noon on Saturdays. See: 941.04 Section (B). 
(14)  Upon entering the cemetery gates, the funeral cortege is in charge of the Superintendent or his assistants, and his orders shall be followed by the Funeral Director. No Funeral Director, his assistant, employee or agent shall be permitted to open the casket or touch the remains without the consent of the legal representation of the deceased or without a court order. 
(E)  Removals; Disinterments. 
(1)  All disinterments are subject to local, County and State laws and shall be enforced at all times. 
(2)  Arrangements for removals and disinterments must be made with outside firms or agencies. Cemetery personnel are restricted to the excavation of gravesite ground only. 
(3)  The Superintendent shall have the removal permit or disinterment permit from the County Health Departments involved. 
(4)  No disinterments or removals shall be executed in or out of Oakdale Cemetery on Sundays or holidays. 
(5)  Upon entering the cemetery gates the funeral cortege is in charge of the Superintendent or his assistants, and his orders shall be followed by the Funeral Director. No Funeral Director, his assistant, employee or agent shall be permitted to open the casket or touch the remains without the consent of the legal representative of the deceased or without a court order. 
(6)  No person other than authorized personnel of Oakdale Cemetery shall erect or cause to be placed a sign, notice or display of any kind on cemetery grounds. Prosecution will follow any infringement of this rule. 
(F)  Monument, Markers and Memorials. 
(1)  Any person contemplating the erection of a monument, marker or memorial shall first consult the Superintendent, so that memorials appropriate in size and design shall be selected for the proposed location. 
(2)  The design, size and material shall be approved by the cemetery authorities. 
(3)  All orders for foundations shall be presented on a regular form provided by the monument company, signed by the lot owner and dealer furnishing the memorial. 
(4)  No marble or aggregate stones shall be allowed in the cemetery. Any dealer or producer who violates this regulation is subject to removal from the list of approved dealers. 
(5)  All foundations to monuments, markers, etc., shall be made at ground level. (Note Special Provisions of Section 23) 
(6)  All monument foundations shall be constructed of wet concrete, by cemetery employees, under the supervision of the Superintendent or his assistant. Charges will be billed to the dealer ordering the same. 
(7)  Under no circumstances shall a foundation for a monument or marker be installed during freezing weather. The season for installation is usually April 1 to November 15, weather permitting. 
(8)  Persons engaged in erecting markers or monuments or other structures, shall provide planking and use it to prevent injury to established turf. No ropes or chains may be attached to trees or other obstacles. 
(9)  Mausoleum (reserved for future section). 
(10)  Cremation Garden (reserved for future section). 
(11)  The Superintendent shall refuse to permit the erection of, or shall cause the removal of any monument, marker or memorial which does not approximate the material, size or design required for a specific location. A good or better grade of granite or bronze will be acceptable, in the discretion of the Superintendent. 
(12)  Markers, shall be placed two inches from lot lines, rather than placed in an unusual position of the lot. This is to facilitate lawn mowing by eliminating obstructions. 
(13)  No monument, marker or memorial shall be installed without a foundation. 
(14)  Temporary markers shall be allowed until a permanent monument or marker is set in place, but a temporary marker shall not be allowed for longer than one year maximum under any conditions. Temporary markers shall meet the siting requirements of a regular marker. 
(15)  All memorial dealers shall abide by the rules and regulations of Oakdale Cemetery. Any dealer who violates such rules shall be removed from the approved list. 
(16)  Cemetery employees shall exercise all possible care to protect monuments or markers, etc., and the lettering thereon, while working about them. 
(17)  The cemetery personnel shall, to the best humanly possible, try to erect foundations, as soon as practicable, but shall not be liable for certain completed dates. 
(18)  If indebtedness is charged against a lot owner or dealer, the cemetery authorities reserve the right to refuse installations on any lot. 
(19)  Heavy loads of any kind, shall not be permitted to enter the grounds without the permission of the Superintendent. 
(20)  No inscriptions or writings of any kind shall be placed or cause to be placed, on any monument or marker without the proper credentials presented to the Superintendent. 
(21)  Under no circumstances shall any kind of handmade affair, resembling a memorial stone or rough boulder be placed on any lot in the cemetery. 
(22)  Approaching the bereaved and soliciting any business within the cemetery is not permitted. 
(23)  All memorials twenty-eight inches by fourteen inches or less in Section "K", "M" and "O" and future sections, shall be kept flush with existing ground level. 
(G)  General Rules. 
(1)  All visitors are expected to respect the solemnity of the cemetery, and strictly observe the rules which have been established by the cemetery authorities for the purpose of securing quiet and good order at all times, within these grounds. 
(2)  Visiting hours are from 7:30 a.m. to sunset. Visiting at any other time shall be considered trespassing. 
(3)  All lot owners have an interest for the welfare of the cemetery, and are subject to the laws, governing and respecting the rights of others. 
(4)  Persons not conducting themselves in a proper manner shall be excluded from the grounds. We consider these grounds as sacred, and people should act accordingly, while visiting here. 
(5)  No person shall mar or deface any property within the cemetery. 
(6)  Authorized cemetery personnel shall have the right at all times, to enter upon any lot, mausoleum or other structures, for a reasonable purpose. 
(7)  Vehicles in the cemetery shall not exceed fifteen miles per hour. 
(8)  In meeting a funeral procession on the grounds, a vehicle shall come to a complete halt, and remain so, until the cortege has completely passed. There will be no passing in the same general direction. 
(9)  The driver of a vehicle shall heed and obey all warnings, and signs given by designated personnel. 
(10)  There are trash cans dispersed on grounds for your convenience. Please keep your cemetery neat by cooperation. Your assistance is encouraged and needed, whenever possible. 
(11)  Sprinkling cans are placed at every hydrant, which are conveniently distributed on grounds. When not in use, place them where they belong, so that the next person might find them. 
(12)  Plucking of flowers, breaking of tree limbs, shrubs or any plants, on or off a cemetery lot is prohibited. 
(13)  No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the grounds at any time. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.07. - Minimum depth for graves. 
All burials in Oakdale Cemetery exceeding three feet six inches in length shall be excavated to a depth of not less than fifty-four inches and the bottom of such excavation shall be level. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.08. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 51-04, adopted Oct. 28, 2004, repealed  941.08, which pertained to Oakdale Cemetery permanent maintenance and upkeep fund. 
Sec. 941.09. - Cemetery advisory board. 
(A)  Establish a Cemetery Advisory Board to hear issues. Board shall be made up of a funeral director, a Veteran from a Veteran's Service Organization, (e.g., American Legion, VFW, Amvets, DAV) or a member from a Federally chartered organization (e.g., DAR, Blue Star Mothers), a council member and a citizen. Members shall be appointed by the President of Council and shall be limited to two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms. Terms established to expire as follows: Council Member 2004, Veteran or Veteran Auxiliary representative 2004, Funeral Director 2006, Citizen 2006. 
(B)  The Cemetery Advisory Board shall meet prior to January 15 of each year to elect a chairman responsible for placing concerns and/or issues before the Board for discussion and resolution. 
(C)  The Board shall meet on an as-needed basis. 
(D)  A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(E)  In addition to hearing citizens' concerns, responsibilities of the Board also include studying, investigating, advising and reporting to the Public Services Committee plans and/or recommendations to further the effective operation and maintenance of the cemetery. 
(F)  A journal of its proceedings shall be kept by a member of the Board. 
(Ord. 34-15. Passed 10-22-2015.) 
Sec. 941.10. - Indigent burial procedure. 
(A)  According to ORC 5101.521, a funeral director burying the body of an indigent person that is to be buried at the expense of the City, shall submit to the Director of Finance a notarized statement of the amount of any contributions received from friends, relatives or others, of insurance or property, real or personal, or of any other thing of value, which may be applied to the burial expense of such person, or in the absence of any such things of value which may be so applied. Further, the funeral director shall submit a notarized, itemized statement of the burial expense of such person, as well as a death certificate. 
(B)  Upon the submission of such notarized statement to the Director of Finance and its approval by the City Manager as a satisfactory compliance with the requirement of this chapter, there shall be paid to such funeral director for the burial of such person an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This maximum amount shall include the cemetery and crematory charges, less the amount of any such things of value, which may be applied to such funeral expense as shown by the required notarized statement. 
(Ord. 24-05. Passed 5-12-2005; Ord. 26-18 . Passed 4-9-2018.) 
Secs. 941.11, 941.12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 941.13. - Exceptions. 
In cases of emergency, epidemic, catastrophe or Acts of God, the provisions of this chapter may be suspended by order of the Mayor. 
(Ord. 11-01. Passed 3-22-2001.) 
CHAPTER 945. - GARBAGE AND RECYCLING[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Division of Public Works and Streets, Charter  9.03. 
Cross reference- Vehicle loads dropping, sifting, leaking,  339.08; littering,  521.08. 
State Law reference- Collection and disposal of garbage, ORC 715.43, 717.01; employment of scavengers, ORC 3707.39; disposal and transportation upon public ways, ORC 3767.20 et seq. 

Sec. 945.01. - Storage of garbage. 
(A)  No householder or commercial occupant shall permit to accumulate upon the premises any garbage or other refuse except in covered containers. 
(B)  All garbage and other refuse shall be placed in the toters provided by the City's garbage and recycling contractor. Where practicable, all garbage shall be drained of liquids and wrapped in papers. All containers shall be washed and treated with a disinfectant as often as necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(C)  Insofar as practicable, boxes, papers and odd articles shall be crushed and bundled in lengths not to exceed three feet and not to exceed fifty pounds in weight. 
(D)  No person, unless authorized to do so, shall remove the lid from any refuse container or collect, molest or scatter refuse stored in such container. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.02. - Collection of garbage and refuse. 
(A)  The City shall collect, or provide for the collection of all garbage and other refuse from all residential premises within the City at least once a week. 
(B)  At the discretion of the City may make arrangements to provide for collection of refuse for non-residential accounts where the placement of toters or dumpsters is determined not to be feasible. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.03. - Disposal of garbage. 
(A)  All householders in the City shall dispose of all collectable garbage through the municipal collection service and shall not dispose of garbage by any other means, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(B)  The City shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage and other refuse, within reason, created within the City in a manner so as not to cause a public health nuisance or other conditions detrimental to public health and comfort. 
(C)  No person shall interfere with garbage toters containing waste materials, nor shall any person remove garbage toters from the location where placed by the owner thereof, or remove any of the contents of such toters. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.04. - Service charges. 
(A)  For trash and garbage service the following monthly rates shall be in effect: 
January 1, 2017 January 1, 2018 January 1, 2019 January 1, 2020 January 1, 2021 January 1, 2022 Householders who are not in excess of 65 years of age and commercial occupants required to purchase sanitation services from the City of Marysville Refuse Fee $16.00 $16.00 $20.50 $21.00 $21.50 $22.00 Householders who are not in excess of 65 years of age and commercial occupants required to purchase sanitation services from the City of Marysville Sanitation Fee $5.75 $6.50 $7.00 $7.50 $8.00 $8.50 Householders required to purchase sanitation services from the City of Marysville who are in excess of 65 years of age occupants Refuse Fee $10.00 $10.00 $12.75 $12.75 $12.75 $12.75 Householders required to purchase sanitation services from the City of Marysville who are in excess of 65 years of age occupants Sanitation Fee $5.75 $6.50 $7.00 $7.50 $8.00 $8.50  
Householders desirous of obtaining the reduced pricing for being in excess of 65 years of age are hereby required to make application to the City of Marysville in accordance with City Policy. Approval of the application will be at the discretion of the City after review for: proof of age, residency in the property for which the application is submitted, and other factors as required to determine the person making the application will be the direct beneficiary of the rate reduction. 
(B)  Anyone desiring to lease an additional trash receptacle from the contracted hauler will be assessed an additional fee per the negotiated contract price ($3.40 per month for the period January 1, 2014-December 31, 2014). This additional fee will be remitted to the contracted hauler as a direct "pass-through" cost for the service provided. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013; Ord. 46-16. Passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 67-18 . Passed 11-26-2018.) 
Sec. 945.05. - Collection of service charges; refunds. 
(A)  All bills for garbage/recycling service delinquent as of July 15th of each year shall have a final written notice issued with full payment due by July 31st. At such time, the Director of Finance may certify such charges, together with a penalty of five percent (5%) thereon, to the County Auditor, who shall place such amount on the tax duplicate and collect such charges as penalties in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(B)  Refunds shall not be made for service discontinued for periods of less than four weeks (one billing cycle). Discontinued service for four weeks or more, spanning over more than one billing cycle, will not be eligible for a refund. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.06. - Payment of bill; overdue bills. 
(A)  The owner of the premises served shall be responsible for the payment of all garbage service supplied to their premises. 
(B)  Bills will be mailed to the address of the premises served unless the owner requests, in writing, that they shall be sent to some other address supplied by him. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the owner from obligation to pay for service rendered when due. 
(C)  Each bill for water service remaining unpaid fifteen (15) days after the bill date shall become delinquent and subject to a five percent (5%) surcharge for late payment. 
(D)  A customer's bill will be accepted as "on time" if mailed on or before the past due date indicated on the bill. The stamped post office date will determine the mailing date of the customer's payment. The bill will be considered "past due" if it does not meet these stipulations. All past due bills will be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty. The City may assess credit this amount to the customer's account and include this amount within the next billing cycle if sufficient proof is provided and approved by the City. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.07. - Uncollected garbage a nuisance. 
Fermenting, putrefying or odoriferous garbage or other refuse in open containers, or dumped in the open, is declared to be a nuisance and the person responsible shall be liable to prosecution under the provisions of ORC 3767.13 et seq. 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
Sec. 945.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 56-13. Passed 12-5-2013.) 
CHAPTER 951. - PARKS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Land appropriation for parks, ORC 715.21, 719.01; power to regulate vehicle speed in parks, ORC 4511.07(E). 

Sec. 951.01. - Definitions. 
(A)  City means City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(B)  City park means all areas designated as park areas that are maintained or controlled by the City. 
(C)  Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee means the person(s) empowered by the City to cause the enforcement of the rules and regulations of the parks. 
(D)  Person means any individual, company, partnership, corporation or association of any combination of individuals or any employee, agent or officer thereof. 
(E)  Park waters means any lake, pond, reservoir, stream, channel, lagoon or other body of water, or any part thereof; whether natural or artificial, located in or adjoining a park. 
(F)  Fish or fishing means taking or attempting to take fish by any method, and all other acts as placing, setting, drawing or using any device commonly used to fish whether resulting in such taking or not. 
(G)  Animal or animals means and includes, but not limited to quadrupeds, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, crustaceans, mollusks and insects. 
(H)  Vehicle means every conveyance with wheels, treads or other means or locomotion. 
(I)  Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power. This includes but not limited to ATV's, snowmobiles, go carts, motorized scooters or motorized skateboards. 
(J)  Noxious means any material that is physically harmful or destructive to living beings. 
(K)  Service animal means any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability. 
(Ord. 22-03. Passed 7-10-2003; Ord. 31-15. Passed 10-8-2015.) 
Sec. 951.02. - Public park rules and regulations. 
(A)  Removal or Destruction of Property and Natural Features. 
(1)  No person shall remove any property, natural feature or part thereof including, but not limited to, any building, equipment, sign, rock, stone, mineral formation, earth, wood, tree, shrub, flower, plant from any park without the permission of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  No person in a park shall injure, destroy, break, cut, chop, write upon, mutilate, set fire to, deface, dig, paint or damage in any manner any property, natural feature or part thereof, including but not limited to, any building, equipment, sign, rock, stone, asphalt, concrete, mineral formation, earth, wood, tree, shrub, flower or plant. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  No person in a park shall impound or cause to be impounded any park water or in any way alter or affect the normal flow of such waters without the permission of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(B)  Deposit of Materials. 
(1)  No person shall deposit, discard, dump or leave behind any material of any kind in a park without the permission of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee, except material arising from the normal use and enjoyment of a park and then only in receptacles which are provided by the City for this purpose. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  No person in/or adjacent to a park shall deposit, discard, dump or leave behind any noxious or waste material. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall place or permit to be placed in any park waters any noxious or deleterious substance, either solid or liquid, which may render such waters harmful or inimical to the public health or to animal and plant life. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(C)  Protection of Animals, Hunting and Fishing. 
(1)  No person in a park shall hunt, capture, take, trap or in any other way abuse, molest, injure, pursue or destroy any animal, with the exception of fishing in accordance of the Rules and Regulations of the ODNR. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  No person shall disturb the wildlife and their natural habitat. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  No person in a park shall fish in any park waters in violation of any sign or signs prohibiting fishing or a manner thereof. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(D)  Animal Control. 
(1)  No large domestic or non-domestic pets or animals are permitted in a City Park with the exception of cats and dogs, without the permission of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  No pets shall be allowed in parks posted "No Pets". A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  All pets must be controlled by a leash. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(4)  No pets shall be permitted to cause damage to the park. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(5)  Horses are prohibited in all City parks. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(6)  Pet owners must clean up after their pets. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(7)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall abandon any animal. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(8)  With the exception of service animals, no pets, including cats and dogs, shall be allowed in Partners Park. A sign(s) signifying "No Pets" shall be conspicuously posted at Partners Park. Any person, who is the keeper, harborer, or owner of a pet and allows the pet to be on the premises of Partners Park, is in violation of this provision and is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. Upon a conviction for a first offense the fine shall be not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); upon a conviction for a second offense the fine shall be not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); upon a conviction for a third or subsequent offense the fine shall be not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(E)  Aerosol Paint Cans. No person in a park, except City employees or their agents, shall carry on or about his or her person a container capable of propelling paint by means of a gaseous charge. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(F)  Personal Conduct. 
(1)  All park visitors must obey all posted signs. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall conduct himself, by work or act, in a riotous, disorderly, boisterous or other manner so as to disturb the peace and good order in the park. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall operate or play a radio, TV, musical instrument or amplifying or sound equipment so as to disturb the peace and good order in the park. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(4)  No person in a park shall solicit or procure participants for, engage in or promote any game, which is played for money or other things of value. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(5)  No person in a park shall use insulting, abusive, threatening, profane or indecent language. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(6)  No person in a park shall loiter in the vicinity of a toilet and no person over the age of six shall enter the toilet facilities provided for the exclusive use of the opposite sex. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(7)  No person in a park shall assault or commit bodily injury upon another or engage in or abet or aid in any fight, quarrel or other disturbance. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(8)  No persons or groups of persons shall assemble in or adjacent to any park for any unlawful purpose or in riotous assemblage or with any intent to annoy, harass, or inflict property damage or bodily injury upon another person or persons or inflict damage to a park. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(9)  No person in a park shall solicit or attempt to solicit another to engage in any act of sexual perversion or solicit, or request another to commit, perform, engage in any lewd, lascivious, obscene or indecent act of behavior. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(10)  No person in a park shall appear in a state of nudity or commit, perform or engage in any lewd, lascivious, obscene, illicit, carnal or indecent act of behavior and no persons shall make any indecent exposure of his or her persons. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(11)  No person in a park shall tamper with any security equipment that is temporarily or permanently attached to the restroom or any other structure. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(12)  No person shall ignore or remove a posted reservation notice. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(G)  Camping; Fires, Picnicking. 
(1)  No person in a park shall start or maintain a fire except in a place or site designated for this purpose. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  No person in a park shall build a fire at a time or period of time when the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee has prohibited the building of fires. The violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  No person in a park shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging or sleeping place within a park without a permit from the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. The first conviction violating this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. The second conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The third conviction for this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(H)  Commercial Activities. No person in a park shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege or service unless such sale is pursuant to a contract or an agreement with the City through the office of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(I)  Erecting and Attaching Signs. No person in a park shall erect a sign or attach a sign to property owned or controlled by the City, nor shall any person display any placard, notice, advertisement, circular, banner or statement of any other kind other than a permanent sign on a vehicle without a permit from the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(J)  Fireworks and Explosives. No person in a park shall have in his or her possession any fireworks or explosives, without the permission of the Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee. A violation of this provision constitutes a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(K)  Vehicles and Traffic. 
(1)  No person in a park shall operate or park a motor vehicle in any area other than designated park drive or parking area. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  No person in a park shall operate any vehicle in a manner as to endanger any other person or property. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  No person in a park shall violate the posted speed limit of the park. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any pedestrian access/trail in a park. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(5)  No person shall park a motor vehicle overnight in any park. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(6)  A motorized scooter or wheelchair may be used for the transportation of a disabled person. 
(L)  Swimming. No swimming shall be allowed in the parks. Exception: The Municipal Swimming Pool during hours of operation. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(M)  Ice Skating. Ice Skating shall be permitted only in designated areas. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(N)  Drugs and Alcoholic Beverages. No person in a park shall violate any existing Federal, State, or City laws and ordinances pertaining to drugs and alcoholic beverages and their consumption and usage. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(O)  Hours of Operation. All parks shall open at sunrise and unlighted parks shall close at sunset. Lighted parks shall be open according to hours posted. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(P)  Employee Exemption. 
(1)  Acts of City employees and its agents shall be exempt from these rules and regulations to the extent necessary for the performance of their authorized duties. 
(2)  Director of Public Service and/or Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and/or their designee may, from time to time, conduct or permit activities, which may violate the adopted rules and regulations. 
(Q)  Ejection from Park. Law enforcement officers, park employees, and other agents employed or contracted by the City to administer programs on behalf of the City may order any person violating these rules and regulations to leave the park, and no person shall ignore such an order. A violation of this provision constitutes a minor misdemeanor. 
(R)  Penalty. The penalty for all of the above offenses are set forth and defined in ORC 2921.21, and the above offenses will be enforced in accordance with the provisions of ORC 2921.21. 
(Ord. 22-03. Passed 7-10-2003; Ord. 31-15. Passed 10-8-2005; Ord. 42-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
CHAPTER 952. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR RECREATIONAL USE OF THE MARYSVILLE UPGROUND RESERVOIR 

Sec. 952.01. - Generally. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to the use of the Marysville Upground Reservoir, a City-owned park located in Paris Township, Ohio. The provisions of Chapter 951 of these Marysville Codified Ordinances shall also apply to the use of the Upground Reservoir under this chapter 952, except where in conflict with this chapter 952, in which case the provision(s) of Chapter 952 shall control. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.011. - Purpose of regulations. 
The purpose of these regulations is to specifically protect the public water supply against harmful acts of those who would deliberately or without awareness engage in activities detrimental to the public good. It is also to make possible, in cooperation with the Division of Wildlife and Ohio Department of Natural Resources, the fullest enjoyment of those who choose to make use of the Reservoir for recreational activities, without interfering with the operations of the Reservoir as part of the public water supply or endangering the safety and well-being of users of the Reservoir. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.02. - Licensing and permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat or watercraft on the Marysville Upground Reservoir without it being in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources. 
(ORC 1547.531) 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.03. - Reservoir property. 
(A)  Buildings and Other Property. 
(1)  Disfiguration. No person shall willfully mark, deface, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any building, table docks, mooring stakes, benches, landings, railings, paving, water lines, or other public utilities, appurtenance, signs, notices, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other markers or structures, equipment, facilities or City property whatsoever, either real or perceived. 
(2)  Removal. No person, or persons, shall displace or remove any stone rip-rap from the inside dikes of Marysville Upground Reservoir. 
(3)  Erection of Structures. No person, or persons, shall construct or erect any building or structure whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any service utility into, upon, or across any Reservoir property, except by written permission from the Public Service Director. 
(B)  Trees, Shrubbery, and Lawns. No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant attach any rope, wire a device to any tree or plant; nor dig in, or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.04. - Sanitation. 
(A)  Pollution of Water. No person shall dispose of any object or substance of any kind in the water of the Marysville Upground Reservoir. 
(B)  Refuse Garbage and Trash. No person shall dispose of paper, beverage cans or bottles, empty bait containers, bits of uneaten food or any other form of garbage or refuse by throwing on the ground, in water or on the stone rip-rap inside the dikes. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.05. - Traffic. 
(A)  Motor Vehicle Laws Apply. No person shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the Ohio Motor Vehicle Code in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles. Traffic laws will be enforced per the Ohio Revised Code and the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville. 
(B)  Roadways, Parking, and Access. No person shall operate any motor vehicle in violation of any traffic control device, light, or sign. With the exception of Public Safety and Public Service workers engaged in their authorized duties, no person shall operate any motorized vehicle, not to include motorized wheelchairs, of any design whatsoever, including, but not limited to, motor bikes, mopeds, scooters, snowmobiles, or ATV's, on any unpaved surface throughout the property of the upground reservoir. Parking is allowed in designated parking area(s) only. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.06. - Recreational activities. 
(A)  Swimming. No person shall bathe or swim in the reservoir or allow his or her pet(s) to enter the reservoir without prior written approval of the Public Service Director. 
(B)  Boating. No person shall leave any boat or boat trailer upon Reservoir property or adjacent City owned land after closing hours (as specified in Section 952.08). Failure to remove any boat or trailer will result in its impoundment, to be considered as abandoned by owner. 
(C)  Watercraft Requirements. No person shall operate on the Reservoir a boat or watercraft under the power of a motor in excess of 10.0 horsepower. No person shall operate any boat which exceeds the maximum number of occupants or weight limit set by the manufacturer or designer. 
(D)  Launching and Safe Operation. 
(1)  All watercraft shall be launched and/or landed at the designated boat ramp, except in emergencies. 
(2)  Boating shall only be permitted from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset unless the occupant(s) of the boat is actively engaged in fishing. 
(3)  All watercraft and the operators thereof on the Marysville Upground Reservoir shall be subject to and comply with all watercraft laws. 
(E)  Fishing. 
(1)  Recreational fishing is permitted twenty-four (24) hours a day seven (7) days a week from the dikes of the Marysville Upground Reservoir and from boats that are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Fishing at the Reservoir is subject to Ohio Wildlife Laws governing the same. 
(3)  Fishing is not permitted from the boat launching dock. 
(4)  Bow fishing shall be permitted from watercraft only. All arrows must be attached to a line for proper retrieval. All arrows shall be fired directly into the water only. Bow fishing from shore is prohibited. 
(5)  All fish taken by any method of angling shall be returned to the water alive or removed from the reservoir property in compliance with the Ohio Department of Natural Resources statewide fishing bag limits. 
(6)  Cleaning of fish is prohibited on Reservoir property. 
(F)  Hunting. No person shall hunt or trap on the property of the Marysville Upground Reservoir unless a permit is obtained from the Chief of Police pursuant to the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville. (See Section 505.11, Marysville Codified Ordinances) 
(G)  No person shall discharge a firearm on the property of the Upground Reservoir with the exception of a law enforcement officer engaged in his or her authorized duties. 
(H)  Winter Sports. 
(1)  Sledding. Sledding is permitted on Reservoir embankments away from the water when snow conditions are favorable and only in areas marked and designated for sledding. 
(2)  Skiing. Cross country or down-hill skiing is permitted on all Reservoir property away from the water (ice). 
(3)  Snowmobiles and All Terrain Vehicles. No person shall operate a snowmobile or All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV) on the property of the Upground Reservoir. 
(4)  Ice Skating. No person shall enter onto the ice for any purpose. Ice skating is prohibited on all Reservoir water (ice). 
(5)  Ice Fishing Rules. No person shall ice fish on the Reservoir water (ice). 
(I)  Camping. No person shall camp or stay overnight anywhere on the property of the Upground Reservoir. 
(J)  Horseback Riding. No person shall ride horseback on the property of the Upground Reservoir. 
Sec. 952.07. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
(A)  Vending and Peddling. No person shall expose, announce, call to the public's attention, or offer for sale or lease any article or thing, nor shall they place any stand, cart or vehicle for transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing without prior written approval of the Public Service Director. 
(B)  Advertising and Signs. No person shall expose, distribute, or place any sign, advertisement circular, notice, or statement, or display any banner, emblem, or design within or on the Reservoir property without prior written approval of the Public Service Director. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.08. - Reservoir operating policies. 
(A)  Hours. The Marysville Upground Reservoir shall be open to the public for recreational use from one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset, except when actively engaged in fishing. 
(B)  Closed Areas. Any section or part of any Reservoir property may be declared closed to the public by the Public Service Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Public Service Director shall find to be reasonably necessary. No person shall enter onto any area posted as closed to the public. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
Sec. 952.99. - Penalties. 
A violation of any provision of Chapter 952 shall constitute a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 11-17 . Passed 2-27-2017.) 
PART ELEVEN - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE 
  
SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES 
CHAPTER 1100. - SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision approval procedure, Ch. 1105; zoning permits, Ch. 1125. 

Sec. 1100.01. - Development and zoning fees. 
The following fees and charges shall be set for development and zoning matters: 
(A)  Administrative Services. 
Photocopying Fee Per page (after 1 st page) 
black and white, 81/2  11 1 st page = Free 
2 or more pages = $0.05 
per page Color, 81/2  11 $0.25 
per page Large format/plotting/city map $1.50 
per page Planning and Zoning Code Book $35.00  
(B)  Boards and commissions. 
Board of Zoning Appeals Variance Application (resident) $50.00 Variance Application (commercial) $150.00 Conditional Use Application $250.00 Appeal Application $250.00  
Design Review Board Exterior plan/landscape plan application $250.00 Certificate of Appropriateness Application 
(Designated Historic District) Design Review Revision to Plan $50.00 Demolition (Residential) 
(Demolition Permit Needed If Approved) $100.00 New Construction 
(Commercial) $150.00 Demolition (Commercial) 
(Demolition Permit Needed If Approved) $150.00 Additions/Remodeling 
(Commercial) $100.00 Signs (Commercial) $25.00 Fast Track Application 
(Historic District) $50.00  
Planning Commission Development Plan Application (PUD) Planned Unit Development $500.00 Sketch Plan Application (PUD) Planned Unit Development $500.00 Zoning Amendment Application (Re-Zoning, Final Plat) $500.00 Major Subdivision Approval Application (Sketch Plan) $200.00 Major Subdivision Approval Application (Preliminary Plat) $200.00 
plus 
$50.00 
per acre Major Subdivision Approval Application (Final Plat) $400.00 
plus 
$50.00 
per lot  
(C)  Development. 
Engineering Plan Review Construction Plan Review 
(Site Improvements/Utilities) $200.00 
plus 
$80.00 
per plan sheet Storm Management Report $200.00 
per stormwater report Note: 
 1. The City reserves the right to charge additional plan review fees after the second (2 nd ) plan review. Utility Inspection 
(Stormwater, Roadway/Streets, Wastewater, Water 8.0% of the first one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of estimated construction cost Plus 4% of the estimated construction cost greater than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) but less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) Plus 2% of the estimated construction cost over two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) Note: 
 1. If actual cost of the inspection exceeds the inspection fees outlined in the estimated construction costs, applicant is responsible for additional cost. 
 2. All projects must be completed within twenty-four (24) months of plan approval. 
 3. Projects may be phased, however inspection fees for each phase will be calculated separately Zoning $200.00 
plus 
$2.00 
per 100 s.f. Parkland Residential, including multi-family - $1,000.00 per each residence or unit Commercial - $500.00 for the 1 st 3,000 s.f., plus $0.07 per s.f. for each s.f. above 3,000 s.f. Street Tree Maintenance $7.00 per linear feet of curb Wastewater Impact Fee $5.00 per linear feet of sanitary sewer located outside the right-of-way Fire Review/Inspection $50.00 Water Capacity Fees Based on Utility Capacity Fee Schedule Wastewater Capacity Fees Based on Utility Capacity Fee Schedule PUD Development Plan Review $1,000.00 for 10 acres or less, plus $50.00 for each additional 5 acres or portion thereof over 10 acres PUD/Minor Revision $500.00 Lot Split (Subdivision without plat) $100.00 Lot Line Adjustment Review Application $50.00 Engineering Re-Inspection Service $75.00 Miscellaneous Fees Time and Materials  
(D)  Signage. 
Signs Permanent (Commercial) $50.00 
per sign Portable Sidewalk Sign $50.00 
(one time only fee) Temporary Contractor Sign $50.00 
per work site Seasonal Business Sign $50.00 Light Pole Banner (City) $50.00 Variance and Removal Sign Variance Fee stated in Section 2 of this chapter, Board of Zoning Appeals Sign Removal Administrative/Inspection Abatement $200.00 plus contracted cost of removal  
(E)  Zoning. 
Residential and Commercial Zoning Permits Single Family Dwelling 
(New Construction/Addition) $50.00 Multi-Family Dwelling 
(New Construction/Addition) $50.00 
per unit Commercial (New Construction/Addition) $50.00 
(not including engineer plan review) Certificate of Occupancy 
(Commercial) $50.00 
Fire Inspection 
$25.00 (no interior modification) 
$50.00 (with interior modifications) Temporary Certificate of Occupancy 
(Residential/Commercial) $150.00 
An additional $50.00 will be charged after two (2) failed Certificate of Occupancy inspections Accessory Structures 
Deck 
Shed 
Fence 
Pergola 
Gazebo 
Detached Garage 
Storage Building 
Swimming Pool 
Wall Structure $25.00 Alternative Energy and 
Wireless Telecommunication $200.00 
plus $2.00 per 100 sq. ft. 
(wireless telecommunication/new tower/accessory structure) 
$50.00 
(wireless telecommunication co-location antenna) 
$50.00 
(small wind energy system) 
$50.00 
(small solar energy system) Zoning Verification Request Letter $50.00 Contractor's License $50.00 Street Address Request $25.00 Certificate of Registration $250.00 
(occupies less than five (5) linear miles of right-of-way) 
$500.00 
(occupies more than five (5) linear miles of right-of-way) Right-of-way Annual Registration $250.00 
(occupies less than five (5) linear miles of right-of-way) 
$500.00 (occupies more than five (5) linear miles of right-of-way) Right-of-way Permit $25.00 (sidewalk) 
$25.00 (curb cut) 
$75.00 (water inspection) 
$75.00 (sewer inspection) 
Right-of-way Construction (TBD) per case by case basis Parking Lot Alteration/Expansion $100.00/lot or facility Vacant Building Registration $200.00 (1 st year) 
$400.00 (2 nd year) 
$600.00 (3 rd Year) 
$800.00 (4 th year) 
$1,000.00 (5 th and all subsequent, consecutive years) Demolition $25.00 (non-utility disconnect inspection) 
$175.00 (utility disconnect inspection) Sexually Oriented Business License $100.00 Tall Grass/Weed/Landscape Removal Administrative/Inspection Abatement 
$200.00 plus contracted cost of removal Trash/Bulk Removal Administrative/Inspection Abatement 
$100.00 plus contracted cost of removal  
(Ord. 22-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 24-17 . Passed 5-22-2017; Ord. 61-18 . Passed 11-13-2018.) 
Sec. 1100.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 24-17 ,  I(App. A), adopted May 22, 2017, repealed  1100.02, which pertained to zoning fees and derived from Ord. 31-16. Passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 32-16. Passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 58-14. Passed 7-10-2014. 
Sec. 1100.03. - Payment in lieu of open space dedication. 
The payment in lieu of dedication as called for in Section 1107.16 shall be required in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per residential dwelling unit or five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first 3,000 square feet of a non-residential unit, and $0.07 per square foot for each square foot above 3,000 square feet. Deposits shall be placed in a Parkland Development Fund at the time of final plat approval or at the time of issuance of a zoning permit, whichever comes first. This fee does not apply to residential accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 22-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1100.04. - Street tree maintenance fee. 
Upon the issuance of a Zoning Permit for the construction of a building or structure in any zoning district, the owner of said building or structure shall pay the sum of seven dollars ($7.00) per one lineal foot of frontage at the right-of-way to the City Street Tree Fund. This measurement shall include the side yard frontage on corner lots. The fee shall be used for the purpose of implementing an Urban Forestry Program, whose goal is to provide uniform street tree plantings and maintenance along public roadways within the City. This fee does not apply to modifications made to existing structures or the construction of accessory buildings, nor does it apply to the reconstruction of a building or structure destroyed by fire or natural disaster. 
(Ord. 2-17 . Passed 1-23-2017.) 
TITLE ONE - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1101. - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning Code definitions,  1123.01; family care, group homes defined,  1149.02. 
State Law reference- Plat and subdivision defined, ORC 711.001. 

Sec. 1101.01. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Marysville, Ohio," and shall hereinafter be referred to as "these regulations." 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1101.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  Interpretation of Terms or Words. Words in these Subdivision Regulations are used in their ordinary English usage. Certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted and defined as follows and wherever used in these regulations shall have the meaning indicated in this section. "Shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory and shall be complied with unless waived; "may" is to be interpreted as having permission or being allowed to carry out a provision; "should" is to be interpreted as expressing that the application of such criterion or standard is desired and essential unless commensurate criteria or standards are achieved. All words used in the singular include the plural, the masculine includes the feminine and the neuter, and the present tense includes future tense, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(1)  Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets or highways, railroad rights-of-way, parks, streams or other bodies of water or a combination thereof. 
(2)  Capital improvements program means a proposed schedule of future public improvement projects and major equipment purchases listed in order of priority, with cost estimates and anticipated means of financing each project for a specified time period. All major projects and purchases requiring public funds over and above the operating expenses for the replacement or initial acquisition of the community's physical assets are included. 
(3)  Community facilities means existing, planned and proposed parks, playgrounds, schools and other public lands and buildings located within the City of Marysville. 
(4)  Comprehensive plan means the plan or plans adopted by the City of Marysville, as may be amended, indicating the general locations recommended for principal streets, major thoroughfares, parks, public buildings, zoning districts, other public open spaces and public building sites, character and extent of community development or other physical aspects of urban and rural planning. 
(5)  Developer means any person, subdivider, partnership, owner or corporation or duly authorized agent who constructs or contracts to construct improvements on subdivided land. 
(6)  Development means the improvement of a tract or parcel of land, which results in an alteration of land or vegetation. 
(7)  Development agreement contains the following components: 
(a)  Summary and Affidavit. 
(b)  Preliminary Development Plan. 
(c)  Final Development Plan. 
(d)  Restrictive Covenants. 
(e)  Attachments. 
(8)  Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
(9)  Engineer means any person licensed to practice engineering in the State of Ohio and more specifically, a civil engineer as referred to in these regulations. 
(10)  Flood plain means the portion of a river or creek valley adjacent to the drainage channel which is periodically covered with water when the river or creek overflows its banks during flood stage. 
(11)  Improvements means any additions to the natural state of the land which increases its value or utility, including pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, landscaping and other appropriate facilities or plantings. 
(a)  Site improvements means the improvements made to the land outside the exterior limits of a structure or structures. 
(b)  Public improvements means all improvements financed entirely or in part by public funds or which have been dedicated to public use by plat, easement or deed of transfer. 
(12)  Legal holiday as used herein means the following days: 
(a)  The first day of January, known as New Year's day. 
(b)  The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King day. 
(c)  The third Monday in February, known as Presidents day. 
(d)  The Friday preceding Easter, known as Good Friday. 
(e)  The day designated in the "Act of June 28, 1968", Stat. 250, 5 U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial day (Last Monday in May). 
(f)  The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day. 
(g)  The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day. 
(h)  The eleventh day of November, known as Veterans Day. 
(i)  The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving day, and the Friday afterward. 
(j)  The twenty-fifty day of December, known as Christmas day. 
(k)  Any day appointed and recommended by the governor of this state, the president of the United States or the mayor of the City of Marysville as a holiday. 
If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday. 
(13)  Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership and/or for building purposes or development, having fixed boundaries and designated on a plat or survey together with the required open spaces and having frontage on a public street or a private street. 
(13-A)  Lot Line Adjustment means a process that is used to change property lines of existing parcels for the purpose of combining two (2) or more adjacent parcels into one (1) parcel, alter and/or correct the boundary between two (2) or more parcels, or reconfigure the shape of parcels, without creating any additional parcels. 
(14)  Lot Split. See Minor Subdivision. 
(15)  Maintenance bond means an agreement in the form of a surety bond by a subdivider, or developer with the City, for the amount so determined by the City to assure that public roads and facilities are maintained between time of completion by developer and formal acceptance of dedication by City Council. 
(16)  Major thoroughfare and streets plan means the "The Thoroughfare Plan and Transportation Study", as approved by City Council as Ordinance. This plan indicates the general location of proposed freeways, arterials, and collector roadways within the corporate limits. 
(17)  Minor Subdivision means a proposed division of a parcel of land along an existing public street, not involving the opening, widening or extension of any street or road, and involving no more than five lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided, that may be submitted to the authority having approving jurisdiction of plats under the provisions of ORC 711.05, 711.09 or 711.10 for approval without plat. 
(18)  Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision as defined in this section in which three or more mobile homes used for habitation are parked, including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use therein. 
(19)  Monuments means permanent concrete or iron markers used to establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot comers, boundary line comers and points of change in street alignment. 
(20)  Net acre means land area which excludes all street, utility and railroad rights-of-way, and waterways. 
(21)  Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
(22)  Pad means a building site prepared by artificial means, including grading, excavation or filling, or any combination thereof. 
(23)  Parcel means a specific part of a larger acreage of land. 
(24)  Performance bond or surety bond mean an agreement by a subdivider or developer with the City for the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider's agreement. 
(25)  Plan. 
(a)  Construction Plan means a plan which gives information required to construct improvements including plan views, sections, profiles, details, quantities, reference specifications, and standard drawings. 
(b)  Development Plan means a plan which shows the existing ground and the proposed improvements on a tract or parcel of land in enough detail to establish the scope of the improvements, their relationship to the tract and surrounding tracts and to establish the development's compliance with, or to identify the variations from, these regulations. 
(c)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a plan which shows the methods to be used to control the erosion of the site being developed, and to control the sedimentation downstream of the site being developed. 
(d)  Grading plan means a plan which shows the proposed grades for the development in a manner that reflects the scope of earthwork required and the finished site grades. 
(e)  Landscaping plan means a plan which shows the landscape improvements for the. development in accordance with the requirements of the planning and zoning code. 
(f)  Phasing plan means a detailed plan, submitted by the developer at the time of preliminary plat or preliminary development plan outlining the phasing of a development project, including the extension of roadways and utilities throughout the site proposed for development. 
(g)  Plat plan means a survey plan or survey plat plan of tract or parcel of land made by a surveyor registered in the state of Ohio showing public dedications, property lines, lot lines and such other information as is required herein. 
(h)  Preliminary development plan means a plan which shows the existing grounds and the concept of the improvements on the tract or parcel of land to provide a basic understanding of the development. 
(i)  Site plan means a plan which shows information concerning all the site improvements, their relationship to each other, and the final shape and configuration of the site with improvements. 
(j)  Sketch plan means a conceptual drawing submitted prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat (or subdivision plat in case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with planning commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations. 
(k)  Utility plan means a plat that shows the location of existing and proposed utilities. 
(26)  Planned unit development means a large-scale development, in which a variety of housing types and/or related commercial and industrial facilities are accommodated in a preplanned environment under more flexible standard restrictions such as lot sizes and setbacks. The procedure for approval of such development contains requirements in addition to those of the standard subdivisions, such a building design principles and landscaping plans. 
(27)  Plat means the map, drawing or chart on which the developer's plan of subdivision is presented to the City Planning Commission for approval and, after such approval, to the County Recorder for recording. 
(28)  Plat, final means the final map, drawing or chart made by a surveyor registered in the State of Ohio, and supplementary information, based upon the approved preliminary plat, in which the subdivider's plan is presented to the City Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved, will be certified and submitted to the Recorder of Union County. 
(29)  Plat, preliminary means the preliminary map, drawing or chart, and supplementary information, on which the layout and design of a proposed subdivision is submitted to the City Planning Commission for consideration and tentative approval. 
(30)  Setback means a line established by the Subdivision Regulations and/or Zoning Ordinance or resolution, generally parallel with and measured from the front lot line, defining the limits of a front yard in which no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in such Codes. 
(31)  Storm Water Design Manual. The most current copy of the "Storm Water Design Manual", which provides guidelines for developing proper and adequate storm water collection and disposal facilities will be on file in the office of the City Engineer. The Storm Water Design Manual is that manual prepared by the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission. 
(32)  Street means the full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows: 
(a)  Expressway or freeway means a thoroughfare which carries relatively large volumes of traffic at a relatively high speed over long distances. Expressways are usually multi-lane highways for through traffic with all crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access. 
(b)  Major arterial street or principal arterial street means a throughway which carries through traffic, usually intra-city, on a continuous route. Major arterial streets will have no curb parking and will have no curb parking and will use of marginal access roads. 
(c)  Minor arterial street means a throughway which carries crosstown traffic from several neighborhoods, thereby servicing several residential collector streets. 
(d)  Collector streets means a thoroughfare, whether within a residential, industrial, commercial or other type of development, which carriers traffic from local streets to arterial highways, including principal entrance streets of residential developments and primary circulation routes within such development. 
(e)  Local street means a street primarily for providing access to residential, commercial or other abutting property. 
(f)  Cul-de-sac mean a local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround. 
(g)  Alley mean minor ways used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on other streets. 
(h)  Marginal access streets means a local street parallel and adjacent to an arterial highway, providing access to abutting properties and protection from the major street or arterial highway. 
(i)  Dead-end street means a street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular traffic outlet. 
(j)  Half-street means a street or a portion of a street with only one-half of the width paved and having proper right-of-way. Usual access at edge of subdivision where the centerline is also the plat boundary. 
The comprehensive plan gives additional guidance on street classification and definitions. 
(33)  Subdivider means any individual, owner, developer, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another. 
(34)  Subdivision means: 
(a)  The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on or before January 1, 1976 into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easement of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or 
(b)  The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities. 
(c)  Minor Subdivision. See Minor Subdivision. 
(35)  Surveyor means any person registered to practice surveying as defined by the Surveyor's Registration Act of the State of Ohio. 
(36)  Sewers, central or group means a publicly approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and disposal system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community or region. 
(37)  Sewers, on-site means a septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction. 
(38)  Tract means a continuous expanse of land. 
(39)  Working day means the days occurring Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when the last day falls on the weekend or a legal holiday, the act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not the weekend or a legal holiday. 
(40)  Zoning Ordinance means the zoning regulations of the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002; Ord. 8-12. Passed 2-23-2012; Ord. 22-13. Passed 6-27-2013.) 
CHAPTER 1103. - SCOPE AND JURISDICTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Planning Commission, Char.  9.03.01. 
Cross reference- Zoning Code administration, Ch. 1129; amendments, Ch. 1131. 
State Law reference- Planning Commission powers and duties, ORC 713.02, 713.06. 

Sec. 1103.01. - Administration. 
These regulations shall be administered by the Marysville City Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as "City Planning Commission. " 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1103.02. - Policy. 
The City considers the subdivision of land and subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to control of the City pursuant to provisions stated in the purpose. Land to be subdivided shall of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood and other danger, and land shall not be subdivided until all available improvements and public facilities as called for in these regulations exist or their construction is guaranteed by bonding. The existing and proposed improvements shall be reviewed in relation to all applicable City plans. 
(Ord. 16-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1103.03. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of land within the City limits as provided in ORC 711.09. The City Planning Commission shall have the power of review and final approval of the plats. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1103.04. - Relation to other laws. 
The provisions of these regulations shall supplement any and all laws of the State, ordinances of the City, any and all rules and regulations promulgated by authority of such law or ordinance relating to the purpose, policy and scope of these regulations, and any easements, covenants or any other private agreement or restrictions. Whenever the requirements of these regulations are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, agreements or restrictions, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1103.05. - Public hearing. 
The City Planning Commission on its own initiative or upon petition by a citizen or neighboring property owner may, prior to acting on a preliminary plat of subdivision, hold a public hearing thereon at such time and upon such notices as the Commission may designate. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1103.06. - Amendments. 
The City Council may, after public hearing, amend or supplement these regulations. Notice shall be given of the time and place of such hearing by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation published in the area or City thirty days prior to holding of such hearing. The amendment or amendments shall be on file in the office of the City Planning Commission and Council for public examination during the thirty days. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1103.07. - Separability. 
If, for any reason, any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of these regulations should be decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so held to be invalid. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
CHAPTER 1104. - DEVELOPMENT/SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 1104.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define types of development and establish the requirements for developing property in the City. The goal is to develop well planned, attractive and functional neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 17-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1104.02. - Definitions. 
The definitions of Chapter 1101 shall be used in this chapter. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1104.03. - Types of developments. 
For the purpose of establishing requirements and procedures for submission of materials to the City, developments are grouped into two types of development. 
Land can be developed as: 
(A)  A Subdivision, as defined in Section 1101.02(A)(35), or 
(B)  The development of, or alteration to, an existing lot including a minor subdivision pursuant to Section 1105.23. This definition does not include the construction of one or two family dwellings on lots that are reflected on an approved final plat, as described in 1104.03(A). 
(Ord. 17-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1104.04. - Required improvements. 
An owner who desires to develop any land shall provide and pay the entire cost of the following improvements needed to develop such land: 
(A)  Streets and parking areas, graded and paved, including drainage structures, bridges, and when required sidewalks and curbing; 
(B)  Sanitary sewers, including manholes, inlets and all the appurtenances; 
(C)  Water distribution system including lines, services, valves, fire hydrants, and all appurtenances; 
(D)  Storm sewers including manholes, inlets and all the appurtenances; 
(E)  Monuments and stakes as required in Chapter 1109; 
(F)  Street signs designating the name of each street at each intersection within the development. Street signs shall conform to the standards established by the City; 
(G)  Street lighting including poles, underground conduits and appurtenances at intersections and along the street are required; 
(H)  Landscaping; 
(I)  Traffic control devices including signals and regulatory, guide and warning signs, including posts and supports, lane line stripping, and directional arrows, and traffic signals, where required, to be located as directed by the City; 
(J)  All other improvements shown on the plans and as required and approved by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 17-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1104.05. - Plan filing and review fee. 
Subdivision Fees shall be collected in accordance with the Subdivision Fee Schedule as established in Chapter 1100 of the Planning and Zoning Code and in force on the date the fees are due and payable. 
(Ord. 9-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1104.06. - Required submissions and general procedure. 
The following are required for each type of development. 
(A)  The Subdivision of land with plat shall require: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting (Section 1105.03); 
(2)  Sketch Plan (Section 1105.04); 
(3)  Preliminary Plat (Sections 1105.05-1105.12); 
(4)  Engineering Plans to include: 
(a)  Construction and Utility Plan (Section 1107.021); 
(b)  Grading Plan (Section 1109.13); 
(c)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (Section 1109.13); 
(d)  Street tree plan (Section 1140.07(D)); 
(5)  Final plat (Sections 1105.13-1105.21). 
(B)  The development of or alteration to an existing lot or the minor subdivision of land without plat in conjunction with the development of the land shall require: 
(1)  Development Plan to include: 
(a)  A site and/or Utility Plan. 
(b)  Grading Plan. 
(c)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
(d)  Landscape Plan (as required in Chapter 1140). 
(Ord. 17-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1104.07. - Obligations of the owner, construction guarantees, violations of provisions. 
In consideration of the approval of the Construction and Utility Plans, or when there are no public improvements, the site and/or utility plans, the owner of the land being developed shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(A)  No lot, parcel or tract shall be transferred from the proposed development nor shall any construction work on such development, including grading, be started until the owner has obtained the necessary approval of the plans required in Section 1107.021, and when required, the subdivision plat has been filed with the Union County Recorder. 
(B)  No conveyance shall be made for any lot or parcel smaller in frontage or area than indicated on the plat. 
(C)  All construction work and materials used in connection with site and public improvements shall conform to the requirements of the City, shall be observed as required by the City representative when being installed, and shall be installed at no expense to the City. 
(D)  The City Engineer shall be notified in writing three (3) working days before any construction is to begin. 
(E)  The owner shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all claims which might originate by virtue of the development of the subject premises or the conduct of the owner, its agent or employees relative to said development including, but not limited to, any and all claims for damages of every nature whatsoever or for injunctive relief emanating from the construction and improvements or resulting from the construction and improvements of said developed area. The owner shall defend, at his/her own cost and expense, any suit or action brought against the City by reason thereof. The owner acknowledges that the owner or its agents or employees are knowledgeable developers who have utilized said knowledge and skill in developing the subject premises and though conforming to local regulations and ordinances of the City, owner is relying solely on his/her expertise or the expertise of his/her developer in developing the subject premises; and the owner is not relying on any skill or expertise of the City, its agents or employees in preparing the developed area in accordance with sound engineering and development practices. 
(F)  All improvements and utilities will be satisfactorily installed within two years from the date of approval of the final plat, as required herein or within such time schedule as presented and approved by the City Planning Commission. 
(G)  Upon filing of the plat or easements for public improvements, the construction of the public improvements shall be guaranteed by filing with the City evidence satisfactory to the City of one of the following: 
(1)  A performance bond made out to the City of Marysville equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the estimated construction cost of the public improvements, with the provision that the bond proceeds shall be used to cover the cost of contractors, subcontractors, laborers, and other costs to the City of Marysville to complete the project upon default by the owner; 
(2)  A certified check made out to the City of Marysville equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost of the public improvement; or 
(3)  Subject to the approval of the City Law Director and Finance Director, a Certificate of Deposit or an irrevocable Letter of Credit made out to the City of Marysville, equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost of the public improvements. Such Certificate of Deposit or irrevocable Letter of Credit shall be in effect for a period not less than three years or until the construction is accepted by the City. 
(H)  All permits and approvals shall be obtained and all fees and deposits paid prior to beginning any construction of any improvements. 
(I)  During construction and prior to acceptance of any public improvement, the owner shall remove or cause to be removed such dirt and debris and foreign matter from all public rights-of-way, improvements and/or easements as were deposited, left or resulted from the construction of improvements of any nature for the development, within twenty-four hours after being notified by the City that such removal is required. Such removal shall be done to the satisfaction of the City. 
(J)  A development agreement shall be executed in such form and on such terms and conditions as approved by the City administration and the City Law Director. 
(K)  No person or owner shall violate any of the regulations established in these Development Regulations and upon violation the City shall have the right to: 
(1)  Stop all work on the Project forthwith upon the City having posted a notice to stop work at the development site. 
(2)  Continue any unfinished work or replace any unaccepted work to a point that any public improvements do not appear to create a health or safety hazard or create maintenance or repair expense to the City because of their state of completion by: 
(a)  Holding the bonding company responsible for all actual expenses incurred, including engineering, legal and construction expenses, plus interest as defined in subsection (G)(1) hereof, from the date of default by the owner and/or his/her contractor or representatives, to the date the City receives reimbursement for all expenses incurred, or 
(b)  Using the certified check, or proceeds thereof, or proceeds of the Certificate of Deposit or the letter of credit. 
(Ord. 17-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1104.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of Chapter 1104 shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. The enforcement of the fines described herein shall be separate and distinct from the exercising of any City right described in Section 1104.07. In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the City shall have the right to pursue any other remedies provided to it in a court of law or equity. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
CHAPTER 1105. - SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions,  1101.02; construction of improvements, Ch. 1109; required statements forms, Ch. 1115; planned unit development, Ch. 1145. 
State Law reference- Plat and subdivision defined, ORC 711.001; plat and contents, ORC 711.01 et seq.; engineer to approve plats, ORC 711.08; platting in unincorporated territory, ORC 711.10; 

Sec. 1105.01. - General procedure. 
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed and before any sale for any part thereof or permits for construction are granted, the subdividing owner shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
(A)  Major Subdivisions. 
(1)  Preapplication meeting (Section 1105.03); 
(2)  Sketch plan (Section 1105.04); 
(3)  Preliminary plat (Sections 1105.05-1105.12); 
(a)  Construction and utility plans (Chapter 1107); 
(b)  A grading plan (Section 1109.13); 
(c)  An erosion and sediment control plan (Section 1109.13); 
(d)  Street Tree plan (Section 1140. 07); 
(4)  Final plat for each development phase (Sections 1105.13-1105.21). 
(B)  Minor Subdivisions (lot split). (See Sections 1105.22 and 1104.06(B)) 
(C)  The preliminary plat shall be submitted for the entire subdivision or development. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.02. - Coordination of a Planned Unit Development with the subdivision approval. 
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) approach to development is greatly encouraged. However, the subdivision process as outlined in Chapters 1103 through 1115 must also be followed. See Chapter 1145 for the combined PUD and subdivision procedure and requirements. The requirements of the subdivision regulations may be modified by the degree necessary to accomplish the objectives of Chapter 1145. Subdivision regulation requirements so modified must be approved by Council at the time of the legislative act of approving the PUD Zoning. 
(Ord. 3-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1105.03. - Preapplication meeting required. 
The subdivider shall meet with the Director of Administration and/or his/her designated representative(s) prior to submitting the sketch plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of these regulations and the criteria and standards contained therein; and to familiarize the developer with existing plans (i.e., comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan, etc.) the capital improvements program, the zoning regulations, the drainage, sewerage, and water systems for the City and to become acquainted with the Planning Commission's requirements. At this meeting the subdivider and the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative(s) shall discuss details regarding proposed streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other planned developments. The schedule of fees, as set forth in Chapter 1100 will also be discussed. 
(Ord. 10-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1105.04. - Sketch Plan required. 
(A)  Applications for review by the Planning Commission for Sketch Plan: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(B)  The staff shall review submitted materials for completeness and shall: 
(1)  Place the sketch plan on the next appropriate agenda; or 
(2)  Reject the application and return the fee to the subdivider with an itemization of deficiencies. 
(C)  At the Planning Commission meeting the Planning Commission shall review the content of the sketch plan and shall: 
(1)  Approve the sketch plan in principle; 
(2)  Discuss the deficiencies with the developer and allow the developer an opportunity to return on the next regularly scheduled meeting with a revised plan to be provided to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative by an agreed upon deadline; or 
(3)  Disapprove the sketch plan. 
(Ord. 25-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1105.041. - Notification to the Board of Education. 
Before preparing and submitting a preliminary plat for a residential subdivision or a subdivision which contains residential living units, to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, the subdivider shall also give notice, by way of the City, to the Board of Education of the Marysville Exempted Village School District, of the proposed subdivision. Such notice shall contain the proposed location of the subdivision and a copy of the sketch plan, to ascertain the Board's desires as to the location of school sites within the subdivision. The Board of Education may communicate its desires to the Commission within 45 days after receipt of the proposed sketch plan described above. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.05. - Preliminary Plat required. 
After the sketch plan approval in principle, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shall conform with the requirements set forth in Sections 1105.06 through 1105.12. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.06. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
Application for review by the Planning Commission for Preliminary Plat: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(D)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 26-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1105.07. - Preliminary plat form. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet, and shall be on one or more sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size. If more than one sheet is needed, each sheet shall be numbered and the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.08. - Preliminary plat deviation. 
A request of any proposed deviations and variances from the Planning and Zoning Code must be submitted with the preliminary plat per Section 1113.06. 
(Ord. 27-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1105.09. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1105.10. - Filing of preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be considered accepted after it is reviewed by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative and found to be complete. The date of acceptance will be deemed to be the date of filing. A filing fee shall be collected, as indicated in Section 1113.05 at the time the application is provided to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. If the application is found to be incomplete, the application and fee shall be returned to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
Once the application is reviewed and accepted by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, they shall: 
(A)  Forward copies of the preliminary plat to such officials and agencies as may be necessary for the purpose of study and recommendation. 
(B)  Place the preliminary plat submittal on the next appropriate Planning Commission agenda. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.11. - Preliminary plat approval. 
Within 60 days of the acceptance of the preliminary plat by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, the City Planning Commission shall, after receipt of reports from such officials and agencies as appropriate (see Section 1105.10(A)), determine whether the preliminary plat shall be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved. The preliminary plat shall not be approved unless the Planning Commission finds that: 
(A)  All the provisions of the applicable Zoning Code, these regulations and other codes of the City are complied with; 
(B)  The subdivision can be adequately served with public facilities, schools, transportation facilities and services suitable in the circumstances; and 
(C)  All land intended for building sites can be used safely and without endangering the health and safety of the residents by peril from floods, erosion, bad drainage, swamp or marsh lands, inadequate water supply or transportation facilities, or adverse school impact pursuant to Section 1107.03 of the Planning and Zoning Code. 
Approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, nor shall it grant the subdivider the right to construct improvements, but shall be an endorsement of the layout and intent of the proposal, and shall govern the preparation of the final plat. 
If disapproved, the reasons for a disapproving vote shall be stated by those members and it shall be captured in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-09, adopted May 14, 2009, repealed  1105.11, which pertained to construction and utility plan requirements. 
Sec. 1105.12. - Approval period. 
(A)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve months and shall guarantee that the terms under which the approval was granted will not be affected by changes to these regulations, or changes in the Zoning Ordinance provided that a final plat is filed within this period. 
(B)  The approval of the Planning Commission shall be null and void for all undeveloped portions of a development as shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  If a final plat has not been submitted to the Planning Commission for the first phase of development within twelve months of the preliminary plat approval or on the schedule as established in the approval of the preliminary plat. 
(2)  If a final plat has not been submitted to the Planning Commission for the next phase of development within twelve months of the approval by the City of a preceding phase of development or on a schedule as established in the approval of the previous final plat, or 
(3)  The City Planning Commission, upon demonstration in writing of extenuating circumstances may at their discretion grant extensions of the 12 month approval period. Granting of such extensions may result in additional bond being required. 
(4)  If the time limits stated in subsections (B)(1) or (B)(2) hereof have been exceeded and no time extension has been granted per subsection (B)(3) hereof by the Planning Commission. 
(C)  All phases occurring after the original approval period, as described in this section, shall be in conformance with the current zoning standards in effect at the time of filing. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.13. - Final plat required. 
(A)  The subdivider, having received approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, shall submit a final plat of the subdivision only after: 
(1)  The drawings and specifications of the improvements required in Chapter 1107 and 1109 are approved by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. 
(2)  A developers agreement in such form and such terms as are required by the City is signed. 
(3)  The subdivider has furnished a performance bond to the City in the amount of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the estimated construction cost of the ultimate installation of the improvements or for the amount of the estimated construction cost of the uncompleted improvements. The bond shall assure the City that the subdivider shall faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing such improvements in accordance with these regulations. Before the bond is accepted, it shall be approved by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. Cash deposit, letter of credit or other instrument may be provided in lieu of a bond when approved by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. The term of the bond shall state: "This obligation shall remain in full force and effect until termination in writing by the City of Marysville, Ohio". Release of the performance bond shall be in accordance with Section 1113.04. Inspection of Construction of Public Improvements fees shall be collected pursuant to Chapter 1100 prior to construction. 
(B)  The final plat shall have incorporated all changes in the preliminary plat required by the City Planning Commission. It shall conform to the preliminary plat except for minor technical adjustments or corrections that do not significantly change the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009; Ord. 11-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1105.14. - Application for final plat approval. 
Application for review by the Planning Commission for Final Plat: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall include an original tracing (as set forth in Section 1105.16). 
(D)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(E)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 28-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1105.15. - Regulations governing improvements. 
No construction shall be permitted prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.16. - Final plat form. 
The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall be on one or more sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size. If more than one sheet is needed, each sheet shall be numbered and the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown. The subdivider shall also submit one copy of the final plat legibly drawn in India ink on Mylar or other materials of equal permanence. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Secs. 1105.17-1105.19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1105.20. - Filing of final plat. 
The final plat shall be considered accepted after. it is reviewed by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative and found to be complete. The date of acceptance will be deemed to be the date of filing. A filing fee shall be collected, as indicated in Section 1113.05 at the time the application is provided to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. If the application is found to be incomplete, the application and fee shall be returned to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
Once the application is reviewed and accepted by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, they shall: 
(A)  Forward copies of the final plat to such officials and agencies as may be necessary for the purpose of study and recommendation; 
(B)  Place the final plat submittal on the next appropriate agenda. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.21. - Final plat approval. 
Within 60 days of the acceptance of the final plat by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, the City Planning Commission shall, after receipt of reports from such officials and agencies as appropriate (See Section 1105.20(A)), determine whether the final plat shall be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved. Failure of the Commission to act upon the final plat within such time shall be deemed as approval of the plat. 
If disapproved, the reasons for a disapproving vote shall be stated by those members and it shall be captured in the minutes of the meeting. Disapproval shall also be endorsed on the final plat as "Disapproved: Marysville Planning Commission; Date; Signature of Commission Chairman". 
If a development is phased, reference Section 1105.12 for expiration time frames. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.211. - Construction of improvements. 
In no event shall the completion of the final plat improvements exceed two years from the date of the final plat approval. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.22. - Transmittal of original tracings and copies. 
When the final plat has been approved by the City Planning Commission, the following steps shall be followed in subsequent order: 
(A)  Prior to beginning of any construction, the original signed tracings shall be returned to the subdivider, for filing with the County Recorder. 
(B)  After original tracings are recorded, return recorded tracing to the City Engineer. 
(C)  Upon completion of construction of all public infrastructure, the subdivider shall have transmitted to the City Engineer the construction and utility plans prepared under Chapters 1107 and 1109. The original tracings shall be revised to reflect as built conditions upon the completion of the infrastructure for the project or each of its phases. A maintenance bond shall also be required as set forth in Section 1113.04. After the one year maintenance period, the final original tracing of the final plat shall be forwarded to City Council for dedication of public infrastructure. 
(D)  Once City Council accepts the public infrastructure for dedication, the final original tracings shall be returned to the subdivider for filing with the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 18-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1105.23. - Minor subdivisions (lot splits). 
(A)  The Director of Administration or his/her designated representative should be consulted as to the purpose and effects of Minor Subdivisions (Lot Splits). An application to proceed with a minor subdivision must be obtained. Approval without a plat of the proposed minor subdivision may be granted by the Director of Administration for those subdivisions within the corporation limits if the proposed division of a parcel of land meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision is located along an existing public street or road and involves no opening, widening or extension of any street or road; and 
(2)  No more than five lots are involved after the original parcel has been completely subdivided; and 
(3)  The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable subdivision or zoning regulations including frontage on a public road; and 
(4)  The property has been surveyed and a sketch and legal description of the property is submitted with the application; and 
(5)  The property has been approved by the Board of Health for sewage disposal if a public sewer is not available. 
(B)  If approval is given under these provisions, the Director of Administration, shall within seven days after submission approve such proposed division and, upon presentation of a conveyance for such parcel, shall stamp "Approved by the City of Marysville Director of Administration: no plat required" and the Director of Administration shall sign the conveyance. 
(Ord. 23-13. Passed 6-27-2013.) 
Sec. 1105.24. - Lot line adjustment. 
(A)  The Director of Administration or his/her designated representative should be consulted as to the purpose and effects of Lot Line Adjustments. An application to proceed with Lot Line Adjustments must be obtained. Approval without a plat of the proposed adjustment may be granted by the Director of Administration for those subdivisions within the corporation limits if the proposed division of a parcel of land meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposed adjustment does not create any additional lots; and 
(2)  The proposed adjustment does not create a non-conforming lot; and 
(3)  The proposed adjustment does not cause any structures, driveways, etc., to become non-conforming; and 
(4)  The property has been surveyed and a copy of the survey and legal description of the property is submitted with the application, including area map showing adjacent properties. 
(B)  If approval is given under these provisions, the Director of Administration, shall within seven days after submission approve such proposed division and, upon presentation of a conveyance for such parcel, shall stamp "Approved by the City of Marysville Director of Administration: no plat required" and the Director of Administration shall sign the conveyance. 
(Ord. 24-13. Passed 6-27-2013.) 
CHAPTER 1107. - DESIGN STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Districts established, Ch. 1135; district regulations, Chs. 1137, 1139; off-street parking, Ch. 1141. 
State Law reference- Inspection of streets and acceptance, ORC 711.09; marking flood areas, ORC 1521.14; conservancy districts, purpose, ORC 6101.04. 

Sec. 1107.01. - General statement. 
The regulations in Sections 1107.02-1107.17, shall control the manner in which streets, lots and other elements of a subdivision are arranged on the land. These design controls shall help ensure convenient and safe streets, creation of usable lots, provision of space for public utilities, and reservation of land for recreational uses. 
The City Planning Commission has the responsibility for reviewing the design of each future subdivision throughout its design development. The Commission shall confirm that all of the requirements of Sections 1107.02-1107.17 are met. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.02. - Conformity to development plans and zoning. 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets or roads shall conform with the City's thoroughfare plan. Streets or roads or any parts thereof contained in the adopted plans shall be dedicated to the public for street purposes by the subdivider/developer. Streets or roads not contained in the aforementioned plan shall conform to the recommendation of the City Planning Commission, based upon the design standards set forth in this chapter. In addition, no final plat of land within the area in which an existing resolution or ordinance including the Marysville Zoning Ordinance and the capital improvements program is in effect shall be approved unless it conforms with such resolution or ordinance. 
When developing along one side of an existing or planned street or roadway which is included in the City's thoroughfare plan or an approved preliminary development plan, the subdivider/developer shall be responsible for sidewalk, curb, pavement widening to thoroughfare width on his or her side, all necessary adjustments to existing pavement, extensions of water main and sanitary sewer as deemed necessary by the City Engineer, and storm drainage for the street in accordance with current design standards as set forth by the City Engineer. As determined by the City Planning Commission, the subdivider/developer shall also be responsible for installation of street trees, landscaping and buffering along existing streets which may abut their development. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.021. - Construction and utility plan requirements. 
All drawings and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(A)  Construction Plans. Based on the preliminary plat and required changes relating thereto, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a set of construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared for all public sanitary sewers, water lines, streets, street lights, pavement, sidewalks and storm sewers which are proposed for construction. All construction plans and specifications shall be approved in advance by the City Engineer, before submittal of the final plat to Planning Commission for approval. The plan shall: 
(1)  Contain information on the sanitary sewer and the water line plans and shall conform to the requirements of the City of Marysville Specifications. 
(2)  Be made on linen, Mylar or other accepted material, sizes 24 inches by 36 inches, with a one-inch border on the left and a one-half inch border around the balance of the sheet. 
(3)  Show the relationship between the proposed work and the existing topography conditions. Both the existing conditions and proposed work shall be shown in both plan and profile on the same sheet and in sufficient detail to clearly show all work to be done. 
(4)  Contain general notes and a summary of estimated quantities. 
(5)  Be made in ink and a title block shall be included in the lower right hand corner of each sheet except on the title sheet. Spaces shall be provided on the first sheet for the approval signatures of the City Mayor, City Engineer and the Public Service Director. 
(6)  Show on the first sheet for the plans a location map, development title, required signature spaces, standard drawing lists and index when required. 
(7)  Show the routing of construction traffic to the development and within the development shall be included. 
Additional information: 
Supplemental specifications may be submitted as separate documents on eight and one-half by eleven inch paper or may be added onto the plans. 
(B)  Site and Utility Plans. Site and/or Utility Plans may be prepared in lieu of Construction Plans for any development that does not require a plat or for any portion of a development that does not involve installing public improvements. 
The plans shall: 
(1)  Show the horizontal and vertical location of the utility and site improvements in sufficient detail to fully describe the improvements. 
(2)  Show the existing topography and utilities for the land being developed, as well as enough of the adjacent lots or area to show what effect the proposed improvements will have on the existing utilities and adjacent lots or area. 
(3)  Include a location map, development title, scale, north arrow and references to the City development standards and requirements. 
(4)  Be at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet or larger. 
(5)  Show all site improvements for any development. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.03. - Suitability of land. 
(A)  If the City Planning Commission finds that land proposed to be subdivided is deemed unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage, swamp or marsh lands, inadequate water supply, schools, transportation facilities or other such conditions which may endanger health, life or property; and if from investigations conducted by the public agencies concerned it is determined that in the best interests of the public then the land should not be developed for the purpose proposed. 
(B)  The Commission may approve the land for subdivision if adequate methods are advanced by the subdivider for clearly meeting or resolving the existing problems and/or problems that will be created by the development of the land. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.04. - Street design. 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the thoroughfare plan of the City or subsequent amendments thereof, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivision, but the minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. The subdivider shall provide within the boundaries of the subdivision plat, by dedication, the necessary right-of-way for the widening, continuance or alignment of such streets in conformity with the thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.05. - Horizontal alignment. 
(A)  The radius of curvature on the centerline of streets shall comply with standards that are approved by the City Engineer and shall not be less than the following: 
Street Classification Minimum Radius of Curvature Arterial street 500 feet Collector street 300 feet Local street 150 feet  
(B)  When there is an angle of deflection of more than one degree between two centerline tangent sections of a street, a curve of adequate radius shall connect them. Between reverse curves a minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be introduced. Minimum horizontal visibility, measured on the centerline, shall conform to the Ohio Department of Transportation's regulations in effect on the date of the approval of the preliminary plat. Where sight distance problems or other engineering requirements make it imperative, the pavement adjustment shall include the replacement on as much as the entire existing pavement as required by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.06. - Vertical alignment. 
All changes of grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equal to twenty times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for arterials and industrial streets; for collector and local streets, fifteen times. Minimum vertical visibility shall conform to the Ohio Department of Transportation's regulations in effect on the date of the approval of the preliminary plat. Where sight distance problems or other engineering requirements make it imperative, the pavement adjustment shall include the replacement of as much as the entire existing pavement as required by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.07. - Right-of-way and pavement widths. 
(A)  The street or road right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following: 
Street Classification Right-of-Way Width Expressway * Major arterial street 100 feet Minor arterial street 80 feet Collector street 70 feet Local street 60 feet Marginal access 30 feet  
 * Subject to Ohio Department of Transportation specifications. 
(B)  Where there are unusual topographical or other physical conditions, the City Planning Commission may require greater widths for rights-of-way. 
(C)  On-street parking shall be determined by roadway widths (measured from face of curb to face of curb). No roadway shall be constructed to a width of less than 29 feet. Parking requirements shall be as outlined below: 
> 29'-34' pavement: parking on one side of street only. Parking shall not be permitted on the same side of the street as the fire hydrants. 
34' + pavement: subject to determination by City Engineer. 
Developers shall be responsible for the installation of the required signage. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.08. - Street grades. 
(A)  Street or road grades shall not exceed the following: 
Street Classification Grade Major arterial street 4% Minor arterial street 6% Collector street 8% Local street 8%  
(B)  No street grade shall be less than .5 percent, and in no case shall a street grade be more than three percent within 100 feet of an intersection. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.09. - Special street types. 
The following requirements shall apply to special street types: 
(A)  Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall have a minimum length of 160 feet unless the Planning Commission finds that exceptional topographical or other physical features exist. The closed end shall be a paved turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet to the outer pavement edge and a radius of sixty feet to the right-of-way line. Pavement shall cover all area within the outer pavement edge. However, cul-de-sac streets with a radius of eighty feet or greater may have an open space in the center for landscaping, so long as maintenance responsibilities of such open space are provided by adjacent property owners or the developer through deed covenants. 
(B)  Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted. Temporary dead-end streets shall be permitted only as part of a continuing street plan, and only if a temporary turnaround satisfactory to the Commission in design, maintenance and removal is provided. Temporary dead-end streets longer than 200 feet shall not be permitted. 
(C)  Dedication of new half-streets shall not be permitted. Where a dedicated or platted half-street exists adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half shall be platted. 
(D)  Where a subdivision adjoins an arterial street, a marginal access street may be required to control access to the arterial from lots fronting on it. Access is controlled in the interest of public safety and to maintain the design capacity of the street system. A planting strip having a minimum width of twenty feet shall be provided between the pavement of the arterial street and the pavement of the marginal access street. The City Planning Commission, before approving the minimum width for a planting strip, shall take into account the physical location of major public utility lines as they relate to the existing and potential development along both sides of the highway. 
(E)  (1)  Public alleys shall not be approved in residential districts, except where justified by extreme conditions. 
(2)  Alleys may be acceptable in commercial and industrial districts if other provisions cannot be made for adequate service access. When required, alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of twenty feet and a minimum pavement width of twenty feet. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.10. - Street intersections. 
The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of street intersections unless stricter requirements are deemed necessary by the City Engineer: 
(A)  Streets shall be designed to intersect at ninety degrees. Streets shall remain in the right angle of intersection for 100 feet beyond the point of intersection. Deviation from ninety degrees shall be at the approval of the City Engineer. 
(B)  Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the number of intersections with the arterial shall be kept to a minimum and shall not be located less than 1,000 feet apart, measured from center line to center line. Intersections of local streets with local or collector streets shall not be located less than 150 feet apart; intersections of collector streets with collector streets shall not be located less than 200 feet apart. Intersections of any street with arterial streets shall be located not less than 1,000 feet apart. 
(C)  Intersections involving junctions of more than two streets shall be prohibited. 
(D)  Pavement and right-of-way radius at intersections shall be not less than: 
(1)  Local and marginal access streets - 25 feet. 
(2)  Arterial and collector streets - 35 feet. 
(E)  Safe sight distances shall be provided at all intersections. Earth banks and vegetation (including trees) shall be removed, as deemed necessary, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to assure safe sight distances. A safe sight distance shall be assured by allowing that no sign, fence, wall, shrub or other obstruction to vision exceeding three feet in height above the established street grade shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points thirty feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.11. - Streets for commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
Streets serving commercial and industrial developments and accessory parking areas shall be planned as to not connect with or generate traffic into residential areas unless recommended by the City Engineer with approval from the Planning Commission. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall comply with the City's Access Management Policy. Streets shall be planned to be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land except for severe physical conditions or if the Commission finds such extension is not in accord with the approved plan of the area. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1107.13. - Blocks. 
(A)  The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of blocks: 
(1)  The arrangement of blocks shall be such as. to conform to the street planning criteria set forth in Sections 1107.04-1107.12, and shall be arranged to accommodate lots and building sites of the size and character required for the district as set forth in these Subdivision Regulations or the zoning regulations and to provide for the required community facilities. 
(2)  Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sacs or loop streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, shall be approved by the Commission when properly designed and located and when the maintenance of interior public spaces is covered by agreements. 
(3)  No block length shall be longer than 1,500 feet nor less than 500 feet. 
(4)  Where blocks are over 900 feet in length, a public access easement not less than ten feet in width with a paved surface at or near the halfway point shall be required, if necessary, to provide proper access to schools, recreational areas, shopping centers and other facilities. Maintenance of the public access easements shall be the responsibility of the Home Owners or Property Owners Association. All sidewalks shall be constructed according to the City Standard Construction Drawings. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.14. - Lots. 
The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of lots: 
(A)  The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots shall provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding development. 
(B)  All lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of these regulations or the zoning district in which they are located. 
(C)  All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where the Commission determines that a variation to this rule would provide a better layout. 
(D)  Through lots shall be avoided except where the Commission determines that it is essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets. 
(E)  No corner lot shall have a width at the building line of less than seventy-five feet, in order to allow proper setback lines from both streets. 
(F)  Every lot shall abut on a public street, and narrow reserve strips of land which are intended by the owner of a plat to prevent access to streets or the extension of sewer, water or storm drain lines from one plat to another are prohibited. 
(G)  No lots shall be formed or building permitted at the closed end of a temporary or stub-end street which would tend to prevent the appropriate extension of such road or street into an adjoining territory. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.15. - Easements. 
Easements at least twenty feet in width centered along rear or side lot lines shall be provided where necessary for sanitary sewers, water mains and storm sewers. Easements at least ten feet in width centered along rear or side lot lines shall be provided wherever necessary for gas mains and electric lines, unless otherwise requested by the respective utility company. Easements shall also be provided as required along every water course, drainage channel or stream within a subdivision. All plats shall contain a restriction requiring that no structures, plantings, etc. will be permitted in the easement area. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.16. - Public sites, open space and natural features. 
(A)  It is the purpose of this section to provide necessary authority to the Planning Commission to require developers and builders of individual residences and commercial buildings to share in the cost of obtaining land and developing parks, recreational facilities and open spaces. Public health, safety and welfare require at least ten acres of such land per 1,000 population, developed with the combination of facilities determined by the Parks and Recreation Commission to meet national standards tempered by specific needs of the community. 
At the option of the Planning Commission, a developer will be required to provide any one of the following or a combination thereof: 
(1)  Dedicate a portion of the land to be developed and construct amenities as requested; 
(2)  Pay a fee in lieu of such land dedication; and/or 
(3)  Develop a park or recreation area per specifications approved by the Planning Commission. 
(4)  Reservation of land. 
Specifics for each of these options follow. 
(B)  Dedication. 
(1)  Land dedicated shall be at a minimum at the rate of ten acres per 1,000 population. Population of the area to be developed shall be estimated by using 2.6 people per multifamily dwelling unit and 3.6 people per single family unit. 
(2)  Where a park or playground which is shown on an official map or in a City plan for future use, such as a comprehensive plan, is located in whole or in part in the proposed subdivision, the Planning Commission may require the dedication of such area within the subdivision or payment in lieu thereof as provided in subsection (C) hereof. If the Planning Commission requires dedication, the developer will be required to install amenities as requested. In no case shall the total cost to install the amenities for any or all parks within the development exceed one-half of the amount set forth in Chapter 1100 and calculated using the total number of residential units represented on the preliminary plat. 
(C)  Payment in Lieu of Dedication. 
(1)  The Planning Commission may require payment in lieu of dedication when such payment would better fit the overall recreational plans and needs of the community. 
(2)  This payment in lieu of land shall be made to the City in the amount set forth in Chapter 1100, and shall be payable at the time of final plat approval or at the time of issuance of a zoning permit if no plat is required. Deposits shall be placed in a Parkland Development Fund and used only for purchase, development and improvement of parks, recreational facilities and public open space. 
(D)  Construction. Parks or recreation areas shall be constructed by the developer per specifications approved by the Planning Commission. Appropriate deed restrictions are necessary for maintenance of the parkland and to ensure that the land will always be used for recreational use. These areas shall be maintained by the Home Owners Association (HOA) or the Property Owners Association (POA). 
(E)  Reservation. Where other parks, schools or public sites are shown on a map or in a City plan for future use, or are deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, and the developer has already met his minimum dedication requirements, then the Planning Commission may require the reservation of such land. The reservations shall not exceed three years. The appropriate public official shall be notified of such reservation before the preliminary plat is approved and may comment upon the location shown. If, at the end of the three-year reservation period, commencing from the preliminary plat approval date, the public body does not initiate, in writing, the purchase of such land, then the owner may develop the property for his own use in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009; Ord. 12-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1107.17. - Development along railroad and limited access highways. 
Industrial, commercial and/or residential building sites along railroads and limited access highways shall be of sufficient size to ensure suitable depth for such building development and uses. Streets or roads serving such development along railroads and limited access highways shall be so located as to not interfere with possible future construction of grade crossing or grade separation bridges of perpendicular streets. In residential developments a buffer strip at least twenty-five feet in depth in addition to the normal lot required shall be provided along railroads and limited access highways. This strip shall be designated for screening only and suitable plantings provided. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1107.18. - Commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations that are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions as well as additional standards required by the Planning Commission. When imposing additional standards upon non-residential subdivisions, the Planning Commission shall: consider the suitability of the area in regard to the type of development; consider special requirements for street, sewers and other requirements; make efforts to protect existing or proposed residential areas from nuisance by requiring suitable lot dimensions with permanently landscaped buffer strips when necessary. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
Sec. 1107.19. - Flood areas. 
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people, the City Planning Commission shall reject any proposed subdivision located in an area subject to periodic flooding, as determined and illustrated in the current effective flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or other recognized documents or authorities. If the subdivision in whole or a portion thereof is located in flood area, the Commission may approve the subdivision provided the subdivider agrees to perform such improvements as required by Chapter 1313. 
(Ord. 19-09. Passed 5-14-2009.) 
CHAPTER 1109. - CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television systems, Ch. 721; definitions,  1101.02(A)(10); regulations governing improvements,  1105. 15. 
State Law reference- Cornerstones and permanent markers, ORC 711.03, 711.14. 

Sec. 1109.01. - Construction initiation. 
No construction shall be permitted prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.02. - Construction procedure and materials. 
The subdivider shall design and construct improvements not less than the standards outlined in these regulations. The work shall be done under City inspection, and in no event shall the completion of the final plat improvements exceed two years from the date of the final plat approval. Inspection costs shall be borne entirely by the subdivider according to the fee schedule to be determined as outlined in Section 1113.05. Materials and Specifications shall meet the requirements and shall be in accordance with the standards of the current volume of "Construction and Material Specifications" of the Ohio Department of Transportation and the "Standard Construction Drawings of the City of Marysville". 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.03. - Monuments. 
Monumentation shall be accurately set and established at the intersections of all outside boundary lines of the subdivision; at the intersections of those boundary lines with all street lines; at the beginning and end of all curves; at points on curves where the radius or direction changes; and at such other points as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat, including all lot corners. Center marked concrete monuments with a one-half inch reinforcement rod running full length, at least thirty-six inches long and at least six inches in diameter with an identification cap shall be used at the intersections of subdivision boundary lines, unless otherwise authorized by the City Engineer; iron pin or iron pipe monuments at least three-quarters of an inch in diameter and at least thirty inches long shall be used at all other points. All monuments within the construction area shall be set after construction is completed whenever there is a possibility of their being disturbed during construction. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.04. - Street improvements. 
All streets shall be graded to their full width, including side slopes, and improved in conformance with the standards given or referred to in these regulations. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1109.05. - Street width. 
(A)  Minimum street pavement widths shall conform to the City of Marysville Standard Specifications. Where pavement widths greater than those specified are deemed necessary by the City Engineer because potential growth would cause extension and greater use of the street, then the developer shall provide a greater than minimum pavement width. The reimbursement to the developer for the extra width of the street shall be made in accordance to procedures established by the City Administration with the approval of Council. It is the intent of these Subdivision Regulations that future benefitting developers shall reimburse the original developer, or the City if the City participated in the financing of the original oversizing of the street. 
(B)  In cases where pavement widths greater than the minimum set forth in Section 1107.07 are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to serve existing development or traffic flows, the City shall bear the extra cost of providing the greater width required. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.06. - Street specifications. 
Street subgrade, base course and surface course materials and construction standards shall follow the minimums as set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City as provided by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1109.07. - Street curbs and gutters. 
Curbs and gutters shall be required on all residential, commercial and industrial streets of proposed subdivisions. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in conformance with the current volume "Construction and Material Specifications" of the Ohio Department of Transportation and the City of Marysville Standard Specifications. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.08. - Water supply improvements. 
The following requirements shall govern water supply provisions: 
(A)  Where a public water supply, in the determination of the City Engineer, is reasonably accessible or required because of pollution problems, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, built in conformance with the standards of the City Water Department. Public water distribution and public wells system shall meet the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, as cited in the current laws and regulations. 
(B)  Where a public water supply is not available or not required, the current regulations of the Union County Health Department shall be followed. 
(C)  The size of water lines shall not be based solely on present needs, but rather on the contemplated population density and land uses of the area to be served. When oversized water lines are deemed necessary by the City Engineer because of potential growth, to avoid dead end lines, or to assure flow and pressure to the area, the developer shall provide sizes of water lines greater than necessary for a singular subdivision. The reimbursement to the developer for the extra size of the water lines shall be made in accordance with the procedures established by the City Administration with the approval of Council. It is the intent of these Subdivision Regulations that future benefitting developers shall reimburse the original developer, or the City, if the City participated in the financing of the original oversizing of the water lines. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.09. - Sewage treatment. 
The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewage disposal treatment: 
(A)  For areas within the corporation limits, where an adequate public sanitary sewer system, in the determination of the City Engineer is reasonably accessible, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots. The developer shall extend laterals from the public system to the lot line; Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and City standards. 
(B)  All laws, regulations and guidelines set forth by the Union County General Health District at the time of this enactment shall be followed and any future laws, regulations and guidelines deemed necessary for the protection of public health shall be followed as they become effective. The Union County Health Department shall conduct such inspections of individual sewage treatment systems as provided by law and shall have the authority and responsibility of enforcing these regulations. 
(C)  The size of sanitary sewers shall not be based solely on present needs, but rather on the contemplated population density of the service area. Where oversized sanitary sewer sizes are deemed necessary by the City Engineer because of potential growth, then the developer shall provide a greater than necessary sanitary sewer. The reimbursement to the developer for the extra size of the sanitary sewer shall be made in accordance to procedures established by the City Administration with the approval of Council. It is the intent of these Subdivision Regulations that future benefitting developers shall reimburse the original developer, or the City if the City participated in the financing of the original oversizing of the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.10. - Drainage improvements. 
The subdivider shall construct all necessary facilities including underground pipe, inlets, catch basins, ditches or retention basins, as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with the City of Marysville Standard Specifications to provide for the adequate disposal of subsurface and surface water and maintenance of natural drainage courses. In cases of open drainage ditches, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of sufficient width to adequately handle potential maximum flows with access from a public street or ROW for the purpose of maintenance. Drainage ditches, whenever possible, should be constructed with landscaped banks. All storm drainage facilities within the subdivision shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet. Sound engineering practice considering local physical conditions or innovative techniques in variance with the City of Marysville Standard Specifications may be acceptable if approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.11. - Storm sewers and storm water drainage. 
(A)  Where an adequate public storm main is reasonably available, the subdivider shall construct a storm sewer system and connect with such storm sewer main. The subdivider shall also extend laterals from the public system to the lot line of each lot. If such storm sewer systems are not accessible, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to the specifications of the City Engineer. However, in subdivisions containing residential lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in all commercial and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed to service all street and parking lot storm water runoff and be conducted to an approved outfall. 
(B)  The size of storm sewers shall not be based solely on present needs, but rather on the contemplated density of the drainage basin. The reimbursement to the developer for the oversized portion of the storm sewer line shall be made in accordance to procedures established by the City Administration, with approval of Council. It is the intent of these Subdivision Regulations that future benefitting developers shall reimburse the original developer, or the City if the City participated in the financing of the original over sizing of the storm sewer. Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.12. - Culverts and bridges. 
Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have satisfactory bridges and culverts constructed. Minimum requirements shall be observed as follows: 
(A)  All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street or as determined by the City Engineer. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be determined by the City Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be twelve inches. Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls, additional right-of-way or easements may be required for maintenance. 
(B)  Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of thirty feet. The diameter shall be subject to the determination of the City Engineer. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required. 
(C)  Bridges shall be constructed according to current ODOT standards or as approved by the City Engineer. No work shall commence until approval is received from the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.13. - Surface water, erosion and sediment control. 
The following requirements will promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the City. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan must be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer and reported to the Planning Commission before any land disturbing activity takes place. Such plan shall follow the guidelines set forth in the policies of the City. It shall further incorporate the following controls: 
(A)  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this code. Scale of this map shall be no smaller than 1" = 100', unless prior approval has been obtained. 
(B)  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development on the site. Depending on the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
(C)  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, buildings, final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(D)  No area shall be allowed to go into the winter season without vegetative or mulch cover. Permanent seeding shall be applied by September 30. Temporary seeding may be applied through October 30. A heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion shall be placed at the close of the construction season. 
(E)  Provisions for maintenance of the control facilities, including easements, and estimates of the cost of maintenance. Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
(F)  The development shall be designed to minimize erosion potential. 
(G)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.14. - Electric, gas, street lighting, telephone and CATV improvements. 
Electric service, gas mains, street lighting and telephone service shall be provided within each subdivision. Whenever CATV services are reasonably accessible and available, they shall be required to be installed within the area. Telephone, electric power, street lighting and CATV wires, conduits or cables shall be required to be constructed underground. All electric, gas, street lighting, telephone and CATV installations shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.15. - Sidewalks. 
(A)  Concrete sidewalks, or asphalt bike path/walking paths as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be installed on both sides of all new streets. 
(B)  All sidewalks shall be extended to connect with existing walks or to the boundaries of the subdivision if existing walks are not accessible. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the minimums set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City and shall conform to the appropriate City plan. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.16. - Driveways. 
Residential driveways shall be not less than three feet from the side lot line and non-residential driveways shall not be less than four feet from the side lot line. Both shall be constructed according to the standards set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.17. - Street name and traffic signs and pavement markings. 
(A)  Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the City and approved by the City, shall be paid for by the developer at all locations designated by the City. 
(B)  Initial traffic signs including signs that regulate, warn or guide traffic for a new subdivision and as required by the City shall be paid for by the developer at all locations and for all types of traffic signs required by the City. 
(C)  Pavement markings which are necessary to regulate, control and direct the flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic as required by the City shall be paid for by the developer at all locations and for all markings required by the City. 
(D)  Fees for street name and traffic signs and pavement markings shall be established by the Director of Administration and reviewed at least annually. Fees shall include cost of all materials and labor necessary to purchase and install the required signs. 
(Ord. 20-09. Passed 3-18-2009.) 
Sec. 1109.18. - Trees. 
The subdivider shall plant trees within the street right-of-way as required by Chapter 1140 and approved by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 14-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1109.19. - Extra-size and off-site improvements. 
The utilities, pavements, and other land improvements as required shall be designed of extra-size and/or extensions provided as may be necessary to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area in addition to the improvements required for the development of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1109.20. - Off-site extensions. 
If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the City Planning Commission finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1109.21. - Extensions to boundaries. 
The subdivider shall be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as determined by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
CHAPTER 1110. - PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION 

Sec. 1110.01. - General purpose. 
The Property Owners Association (POA) represents the property owner(s) of a planned community. It is intended to be the vehicle for the community communication and for maintaining the common areas and services that exist for the benefit of each member of the association. 
(Ord. 1-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 1110.02. - Associations created; members; functions. 
(A)  With the exception of platted property dedicated to the City, restricted open space, common areas, designated easements and reserves shall be held by the individual members of the Property Owners Association as tenants-in-common or shall be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association, condominium association, community association or other similar legal entity. Documents shall be submitted with the Final Plat which will ensure compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Membership in the Association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of lots or units in the development. 
(2)  The Association shall be capable of and responsible for maintenance, control and insurance of common areas, including restricted open space. 
(3)  The Association shall have the right to impose assessments upon its members, enforceable by liens, in order to ensure that it will have sufficient financial resources to provide for proper care and maintenance of the restricted open space. 
(4)  The Association shall submit to the City Director of Administration by April 15th of each year an annual report detailing the Association's financial status and current officers with contact information. 
(B)  A Property Owners Association is optional if no open space, common areas or reserves are created. 
(Ord. 1-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 1110.03. - Maintenance requirements for open space and easements. 
The ultimate owner of all restricted open space, common areas, designated easements and reserves shall be responsible for raising all monies required for operation, maintenance, or physical improvements to such areas through annual dues, special assessments, and/or valid and enforceable collection methods. The owner shall be authorized under appropriate restrictions and covenants, to place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues and assessments. In the event that the organization established to own, operate and maintain restricted open space, common areas, designated easements and reserves shall at any time after the establishment of the development fail to maintain such areas in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the Final Plat, such failure shall constitute a violation of both the Final Plat and this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 1110.04. - City of Marysville rights. 
(A)  The City shall have the right to assess restricted open space, common areas, designated easements and reserves in the community for maintenance, update and expansion of utilities and facilities. 
(B)  If the City determines an area of noncompliance or concern for the health, safety and welfare of the development, the City shall issue a letter of noncompliance to the officers of record for the POA detailing the noncompliance, corrective action to be taken, and a date by which the corrections are to be completed. 
(C)  Upon completion of the requested work, the City will inspect the site and if the matter(s) of noncompliance have been corrected, the City will issue a letter stating the POA is in compliance as of that date. 
(D)  If the matter of noncompliance is not corrected on or before the date set forth in the letter of noncompliance, the City or its agent may perform the work necessary to bring the noncompliant conditions into compliance. The cost for this work and administration fees shall be billed to the officers of record of the POA for payment. 
(E)  If the payment is not received by the due date stated on the bill, the City may bill the individual property owners for the appropriate financial share of the cost and apply this cost to their utility bill in a manner deemed appropriate by the Director of Finance. 
(Ord. 1-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
Sec. 1110.99. - Penalty. 
See Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 1-08. Passed 1-10-2008.) 
CHAPTER 1111. - MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television systems, Ch. 721; mobile home subdivision defined,  1101.02(A)(14); mobile home park defined,  1123.01(B)(64); mobile home parks, Ch. 1147. 

Sec. 1111.01. - Design standards. 
(A)  The following design standards shall apply to mobile home subdivisions: 
(1)  The subdivisions shall contain a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  Each mobile home site shall have a clearly defined minimum area of 4,000 square feet, with a minimum lot width of forty feet, and a minimum depth of 100 feet. The minimum width of corner lots, however, shall be fifty feet. 
(3)  The subdivision shall have a minimum frontage of 250 feet. The ratio of width to depth shall not exceed one to five (1:5). 
(4)  A side yard on each side of the subdivision and a rear yard of thirty feet or more shall be provided around the edge of the mobile home subdivision. Such yards shall not be occupied by or counted as part of an individual mobile home site. 
(5)  There shall be a minimum clearance of twenty feet between the individual mobile homes. 
(6)  A maximum density shall not exceed six mobile homes per gross acre. 
(Ord. 1026- 78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.02. - Streets. 
All mobile home subdivisions shall meet the street requirements and specifications of these regulations, Sections 1107.04 through 1107.12. All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and drainage structures installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. 
(Ord. 1026- 78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.03. - Walkways. 
Walkways not less than three feet wide which may abut street pavement shall be provided from the mobile home sites to the service buildings and frontage street sidewalk. Sidewalk on the frontage street shall be required at not less than four feet and shall be extended to existing sidewalks or to the boundaries of the subdivision if walks are not accessible. Walkways and sidewalks shall be constructed according to standard City specifications. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.04. - Electric, gas, street lighting, telephone and CATV improvements. 
Electric service, gas mains, street lighting, telephone service shall be provided within each mobile home subdivision. CATV service shall be provided if so determined by Planning Commission in accordance with current City CATV ordinance. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of the final plat. Telephone, electric power, street lighting, and CATV wires, conduits or cables shall be required to be constructed underground. All electric, gas, street lighting, telephone, CATV installations shall be subject to the approval of the City or County Engineer, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.05. - Water and sewers. 
Each mobile home site shall be provided with a water outlet connected to the City or an approved water supply and a connection to the City or an approved central sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.06. - Electricity. 
Electricity, electrical outlets and wiring shall be according to the current provisions of the National Electric Code published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.07. - Drainage. 
The subdivision shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.08. - Health requirements. 
The subdivision shall conform to all County and State Health Department requirements. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.09. - Recreation. 
A safe, usable recreation area shall be conveniently located in each mobile home subdivision the size of which shall be determined at 1,000 square feet per household or mobile home. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.10. - Landscaping. 
The subdivision shall be landscaped with lawns and plantings, including appropriate trees. 
(Ord. 1026- 78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.11. - Screening. 
Mobile home subdivisions shall be effectively screened on all sides by means of walls, fences or plantings except where the area is sufficiently removed from other urban uses as determined by the City Planning Commission. Walls or fences shall be a minimum of four feet in height without advertising thereon. In lieu of such wall or fence, a strip of land not less than ten feet in width and planted and maintained with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet in height may be situated. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.12. - Mobile home stand. 
Each mobile home site shall be developed with a mobile home stand of not less than ten feet by fifty feet and such mobile home stand shall not be less than ten feet from the mobile home site boundary. The mobile home stand shall be constructed of a minimum of six inches of concrete and provide at least two tie-down rings. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.13. - Mobile home skirting. 
Each mobile home placed in the mobile home subdivision shall be skirted entirely enclosing the bottom section, within ninety days after its placement. Skirting shall be constructed of vinyl, aluminum or other suitable material that is designed specifically for skirting. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.14. - Garbage and refuse. 
The storage and collection of garbage and refuse within the subdivision shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards. All garbage shall be stored in fly-tight, rodent-proof containers and shall be collected at least once weekly. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1111.15. - Storm shelters. 
Mobile home subdivisions shall be required to provide a storm shelter for the protection of all residents. Storm shelters shall provide four square feet of floor area per resident, have sufficient ventilation, and have a generator of sufficient size to provide power for heat and light. Windows are permissible if provisions are made for their protection by shutters or other similar devices that are designed for immediate installation in the event of sudden emergency. The storm shelter may be used for recreational purposes, laundry facilities or other purposes. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
CHAPTER 1113. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Violations of rules and regulations, ORC 711.102. 
Cross reference- Subdivision approval procedure, Ch. 1105; required statements forms, Ch. 1115; Zoning Code enforcement, Ch. 1125. 

Sec. 1113.01. - Recording of plat. 
No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded by the County Recorder of Union County or have any validity until such plat has received final approval in the manner prescribed in these regulations. In the event any unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and Council shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1113.02. - Revision of plat after approval. 
No changes may be made to a plat after approval, except that minor technical adjustments or corrections that do not significantly change the plat as approved, may be made with the approval of the Planning Commission upon recommendation from the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 15-05. Passed 4-14-2005.) 
Sec. 1113.03. - Sale of land within subdivisions. 
No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, exhibition of or by the use of a plat of the subdivision before such plat has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in these regulations. Any sale or transfer contrary to the provisions of this section is void. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1113.04. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
(A)  Performance bonds are required as stated in Section 1105.13, to assure the proper authorities that completion of the improvements shall be made and that the improvements are in conformance with the standards established in these regulations. The Director of Administration should secure approval as to the form, sufficiency and execution of the bond from their appropriate legal counsel, The performance bond shall not be released until the City Engineer has certified satisfactory completion of all required improvements and the dedication of land and facilities for public use has been submitted to Council, as set forth in Section 1115.02. Council shall accept, within 120 days, all dedications which have been certified by the City Engineer as being satisfactorily completed. 
Reduction of the performance bond may be made, on a prorated basis, for portions that have received the engineer's certification for meeting the requirements and have been dedicated for public use. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal amount. 
If the improvements are not completed on the completion date set forth under Section 1105.15, then the City shall exercise the performance bond to secure completion of the improvements. 
(B)  Maintenance bonds shall be required by the City Planning Commission to assure maintenance of all improvements in the subdivision by the developer, until dedication of such improvements are formally accepted by Council. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be determined by the City Engineer and be submitted and approved in the same manner as performance bonds. The developer shall provide for the upkeep and maintenance of all improvements. If there are certificates of occupancy on any street, which dedication has not been accepted, the City may, on twelve hours' notice, effect emergency repairs for any improvement and charge same to applicant. The maintenance bond shall be submitted for a period of at least one year after the completion of the improvements and offer of dedication for public use is made, and shall not be required longer than two years. 
(Ord. 16-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1113.05. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
The Marysville City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for same, and other matters pertaining to these regulations. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Director of Administration and may be altered, or amended only by Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
Sec. 1113.06. - Variances. 
(A)  The following regulations shall govern the granting of variances: 
(1)  Where the City Planning Commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, due only to exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, or where such a hardship results from strict compliance with the procedures required, it may vary the regulations so as to relieve such hardship, provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the intent and purpose of these regulations or the desirable development of the neighborhood and community. In some cases, such physical conditions shall justify a finding that the land is unsuitable for any subdivision development, as outlined in Section 1107.03. Such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, the comprehensive plan or the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  In granting the variances or modifications, the City Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(3)  Procedure for a variance requires an application, which shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds for the request and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(4)  Any variances authorized or denied by the Planning Commission shall be stated in writing in the official minutes of the Planning Commission, with specific reasonings on which the variance was justified set forth. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978; Ord. 1075-80. Passed 4-24-1980.) 
Sec. 1113.07. - Appeal. 
Any person who believes he has been aggrieved by these regulations or the action of the City Planning Commission, has all the rights of appeal as set forth in ORC Ch. 711 or any other applicable section of the Revised Code. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
Sec. 1113.99. - Penalties. 
(A)  The following penalties shall apply to the violations of these regulations. 
(1)  Whoever willfully violates any rule or regulation adopted by Council for the purpose of setting standards and requiring and securing the construction of improvements within a subdivision or fails to comply with any order pursuant thereto shall forfeit and pay not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such sum may be recovered with costs in a civil action brought in the Court of Common Pleas by the legal representative of the City, in the name of the City and for the use thereof. 
(2)  A County Recorder who records a plat contrary to the provisions of these regulations shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be recovered with the costs in a civil action by the Law Director in the name and for the use of the City. 
(3)  Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within or without the municipal corporation, willfully transfers any lot, parcel or tract of such land from or in accordance with a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been recorded in the office of the Union County Recorder, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot, parcel or tract of land so sold. The description of such lot, parcel or tract by metes and bounds in the deed of transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller from the forfeiture provided in this section. 
(4)  Any person who disposes of, offers for sale or lease for a time exceeding five years any lot or any part of a lot in a subdivision with intent to violate these regulations before provisions of these regulations are complied with shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or part of a lot sold, offered for sale or lease, to be recovered with costs in a civil action, in the name of the City Treasury for the use of the City. 
(5)  In addition to the above penalties and remedies, the Law Director is hereby empowered to enforce these regulations by bringing a civil action for an injunction and/or declaratory judgment in the Common Pleas Court of Union County in the name and for the use of the City. 
(Ord. 1026-78. Passed 7-13-1978.) 
CHAPTER 1115. - PLAT STATEMENTS AND SIGNATURES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision approval procedure, Ch. 1105. 

Sec. 1115.01. - Required statements. 
The following statements shall be affixed on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1115.02. - Dedication. 
DEDICATION 
Know all men by these presents that ___________ and ___________ proprietors of the land indicated on the accompanying plat have authorized the platting thereof and do hereby dedicate the ( streets, roads, parks ) to the ( public or private ) use forever. 
___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ Witnesses Properties  
STATE OF OHIO 
COUNTY OF UNION 
Before me a Notary Public in and for said County personally came ___________ who acknowledged the signing of the foregoing instrument to be their voluntary act and deed for the uses and purposes therein expressed. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my official seal this ___ day of ___________ 19___. 
By ___________ 
Notary Public 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1115.03. - Surveyors certificate. 
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATE 
The accompanying plat represents a subdivision of land (V.M.S. No.) , ___________ Township, Union County, Ohio. The tract has an area of ___ acres in streets and ___ acres in lots making a total of ___ acres. 
All measurements are in feet and decimals of a foot. All measurements on curves are (chord or arc) distances. 
I hereby certify that the accompanying plat is a correct representation of (subdivision name) as surveyed (date) . 
___________ 
Registered Surveyor # 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1115.04. - Acceptance of dedication. 
The following paragraph shall be placed on the final plat if streets, roads, parks, etc., are dedicated to the public use. 
ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION 
The within (streets, parks, etc.) are hereby approved and accepted for public maintenance by ordinance (resolution) number ___ recorded in City Council's record book ___ (Union County Commissioner's Journal) ___________ on this the ___ day of ___________ 19___. 
___________ 
President of Council 
ATTEST: ___________ 
Clerk 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-28-2002.) 
Sec. 1115.05. - Within the corporate limits of Marysville. 
Approved this ___ day of ___________, 19___ ___________ 
Marysville City Engineer 
Approved this ___ day of ___________, 19___  ___________ 
Union County Health Dept. 
Reviewed this ___ day of ___________, 19___  ___________ 
Union Soil and Water Conservation District 
Approved this ___ day of ___________, 19___  ___________ 
Chairman, City Planning Commission 
Approved this ___ day of ___________, 19___  ___________ 
Mayor 
Transferred this ___ day of ___________, 19___  ___________ 
Union County Auditor 
Filed for record this ___ day of ___________, 19___ at ___m. 
Recorded this ___ day of ___________, 19___ in Plat Book ___________ Page No. ___. 
___________ 
Union County Recorder 
(Ord. 6-02. Passed 2-8-2002.) 
CHAPTER 1117. - APPENDICES 
The following illustrations clarify and explain selected definitions. 
LOT TERMS 

LOT AREA = TOTAL HORIZONTAL AREA 
LOT COVERAGE = PER CENT OF LOT OCCUPIED BY BUILDING 
PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
Editor's note- Ordinance 16-05 deleted the Plat Approval Procedure Flow Chart. 
TYPES OF LOTS 

CLASSIFICATION OF THE THOROUGHFARE SYSTEM 

TITLE THREE - ZONING ORDINANCE 
CHAPTER 1121. - TITLE AND INTERPRETATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions, Ch. 1123. 

Sec. 1121.01. - Title. 
This Zoning Ordinance shall be known and may be cited to as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marysville, Ohio." 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1121.02. - Provisions of Zoning Ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1121.03. - Separability clause. 
Should any section or provision of this Zoning Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1121.04. - Repeal of conflicting ordinance; effective date. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance or inconsistent with the provisions thereof are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Zoning Ordinance full force and effect. This Zoning Ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and adoption, as provided by law. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
CHAPTER 1123. - DEFINITIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision definitions,  1101.02; Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) Uptown Marysville Design Review District,  1136.02; family care and group homes defined,  1149.02. 

Sec. 1123.01. - Interpretation and meanings. 
(A)  Interpretation of Terms or Words. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(2)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(3)  Shall is a mandatory requirement, may is a permissive requirement, and should is a preferred requirement. 
(4)  Used or occupied includes the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied. 
(5)  Lot includes plot or parcel. 
(B)  Meanings of Certain Words and Terms. 
(1)  Accessory use or structure mean a use or structure both permanent and temporary that is on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. For accessory structures this includes but is not limited to; sheds, carports, fences, and tents. 
(2)  Adult booth means any area of a sexually oriented business establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(3)  Adult material means any of the following, whether new or used: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally stored materials that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(b)  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(c)  Instrument, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Advertising structure means any outdoor display for the purpose of advertisement, notice or announcement located apart from the premises or product referred to in the display. 
(5)  Airport means any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking-off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down area, hangers, and other necessary buildings, and open spaces. 
(6)  Alley . See thoroughfare . 
(7)  Alterations, structural means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(8)  Artisan Studio means a building or portion thereof used for the creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by no more than ten artists or artisans, either as a principal or accessory use. 
(9)  Artisan Workshop means a use primarily involving the limited on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or mechanical equipment that does not exceed two (2) horsepower each or a single kiln not exceeding eight (8) cubic feet in volume and the incidental direct sale to consumers typical production includes: custom furniture, ceramic studios, glass blowing, candle making, custom jewelry, stained and leaded glass, woodworking, custom textile manufacturing and crafts production. 
(10)  Automotive Vehicle means a vehicle which is designed and manufactured to be self-propelling or self-moving upon the public street or highway. More specifically, as referred to in this chapter, it includes: automobiles, trucks, tractors and motorcycles. 
(11)  Awning (Back-lit) means a back-lit awning is any awning, fixed or retractable, which incorporates any transparent or translucent material in its covering and is illuminated by a light source placed behind the covering. 
(12)  Awning (Fixed) means a fixed structure supported by a frame or bracketing extending outward from the wall of a building which does not retract or roll up and is constructed to provide shade or shelter. 
(13)  Awning (Retractable) means a structure fastened to the wall of a building which, in a closed or rolled up position, does not extend beyond 8 inches from the face of the building and, when extended, is constructed to provide shade or shelter. 
(14)  Basement means a story all or partly underground but having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. 

(15)  Building means any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property. 
(16)  Building, accessory means a subordinate building or structure detached from, but located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or use. 
(17)  Building, height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 

(18)  Building line . See setback line . 
(19)  Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which such building is situated. 
(20)  Business, convenience-type retail means retail business whose market area is the neighborhood or part of the community, which provides convenience-type goods and personal services for the daily needs of the people with the residential area. Uses include, but need not be limited to, drugstores, beauty salons, barber shops, carry-outs, dry cleaning and laundry facilities, supermarkets, etc. 
(21)  Business, drive-in means any business, structure or premises which is designed primarily to serve the occupants of motor vehicles without their having to leave the vehicle. 
(22)  Business, service means any profit-making activity which renders services primarily to other commercial or industrial enterprises, or which services and repairs appliances and machines used in homes and businesses. 
(23)  Business, shopping-type retail means a retail or service business which supplies a wide variety of comparison goods and services to consumers in a market area that includes the community or an area greater than a community. Examples of shopping-type businesses are furniture stores, automobile sales and service and clothing shops. 
(24)  Canopy means a permanent or temporary structure other than an awning or marquee, attached to a building over an entrance and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk, extending from the entrance to or over the public sidewalk for the purpose of providing shade or shelter to pedestrians walking from the sidewalk to the building's entrance. 
(25)  Reserved. 
(26)  Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
(27)  Child Care Home means a private residence where care, protection and supervision are provided, for a fee, at least twice a week to no more than six children at one time. 
(28)  Child Care Center, Class A means a building or a structure which is not a residence, where care, protection and supervision are provided on a regular schedule at least twice a week to at least seven and no more than twelve children. 
(29)  Child Care Center, Class B means a building or structure where care, protection and supervision are provided on a regular schedule, at least twice a week, to more than twelve children. 
(30)  City Zoning Ordinance means the part of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Marysville known and referred to as the City of Marysville Planning and Zoning Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(31)  Civil Building or Use means a building or location that provides for community meetings and/or activities including, but not limited to, City Hall, Township Hall, school administration building, recreation center (public or private), property listed on the National Register of Historic Places, Chamber of Commerce building, Arts Council building, library, or other public buildings owned or operated by the City. 
(32)  Clinic means a place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, but who are provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises. 
(33)  Club means a building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a person for a social, literary, political, educational or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests. 
(34)  Commercial establishment means any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration. 
(35)  Commercial recreation means any business which is operated as a recreational enterprise, either publicly or privately owned, for profit. Examples include, but are not limited to, golf courses, arcades, bowling alleys, theaters, etc. 
(36)  Comprehensive Development Plan means a plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the Planning Commission and Council of the City showing the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major thoroughfares, parks, schools and other community facilities. This plan establishes the goals, objectives and policies of the community. 
(37)  Conditional use means a use permitted within a district other than a principally permitted use, requiring a conditional use permit and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(38)  Conditional use permit means a permit issued by the Zoning Inspector upon approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals to allow a use other than a principally permitted use to be established within the district. 
(39)  Convenience-type retail business means retail businesses whose market area is the neighborhood or part of the community, which provides convenience-type goods and personal services for the daily needs of the people within the residential area. Uses include, but need not be limited to, drugstores, beauty salons, barber shops, carry-outs, dry cleaning and laundry facilities, supermarkets, etc. 
(40)  Corner lot . See lot types . 
(41)  Cul-de-sac . See thoroughfare . 
(42)  Curb line means the vertical plane projected upward from the face of the curb along a street. 
(43)  Day care . See Child Care (27), (28), or (29) 
(44)  Reserved. 
(45)  Reserved. 
(50)  Dead-end street . See thoroughfare . 
(51)  Density means a unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
(a)  Gross density; the number of dwelling units per acre of the total land to be developed. 
(b)  Net density; the number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses. 
(52)  Drive-in business means any business, structure or premises which is designed primarily to serve motor vehicles without the occupants having to leave the vehicle. 
(53)  Dwelling means any building or structure (except a house trailer or mobile home as defined by ORC 4501.01) which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by one or more human occupants. 
(54)  Dwelling, Manufactured Home, Permanently Sited , means a double wide manufactured home built pursuant to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 1974 Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards (1974 HUD Code) and which meets the following conditions: 
(a)  The home was manufactured after January 11, 1995. 
(b)  The home is attached to a permanent frost free foundation (slab, crawl space or full basement) and is connected to appropriate utilities. 
(c)  All indications of mobility (axles, trailer tongue, running lights, etc.) are removed prior to placement on a permanent foundation. 
(d)  The home has a minimum width of at least 22 feet and a minimum depth of at least 22 feet. 
(e)  It has conventional siding (lap, clapboard, vinyl, aluminum, brick, stone, etc.) like a site built house. 
(f)  It has a minimum 6 eaves overhang and a minimum 3:12 roof pitch. 
A permanently sited manufactured home shall be a permitted use in any district in which single family homes are permitted. However, such a permanently sited manufactured home must comply with all zoning requirements that are uniformly imposed on all single family residences within the district in which the permanently sited manufactured home is to be located. 
(55)  Dwelling, mobile home means any non-self-propelled vehicle so designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation when connected to utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks or other temporary foundation and used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and exceeding a gross weight of 4,500 pounds and an overall length of thirty feet. 
(56)  Dwelling, modular means a residential dwelling or house unit constructed in modules and transported to a site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for affixing to a foundation and other assembly operations. 
(57)  Dwelling, rooming house, boarding house, lodging house or dormitory means a dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation, for three or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in the individual rooms. 
(58)  Dwelling, single family means a dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space. 
(59)  Dwelling unit means space, within a dwelling, comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees. 
(60)  Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
(61)  Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground gas, electrical, water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems or sites, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith which are reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety of general welfare, but not including buildings. 
(62)  Reserved. 
(63)  Reserved. 
(64)  Reserved. 
(65)  Reserved. 
(66)  Reserved. 
(67)  Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit. 
(68)  Family Care Home means a home licensed by the State which provides residential services and supervision for eight or fewer individuals who are developmentally disabled, mentally ill, aged, handicapped or children in need of adult supervision. 
(69)  Fence, decorative means a fence, hedge or other landscaping material used for decorative purposes only and not intended for use as an enclosure, barrier, or means of protection or confinement. Decorative fences shall not be site obscuring. 
(70)  Fence means a structure, hedge or other landscape material positioned up to or on top of the property line or setback line for the purpose of separating properties, or for screening, enclosing, and/or protecting the property within its perimeter. 
(71)  Flood plain means that land, including the flood fringe and the floodway, subject to inundation by the regional flood. 

(72)  Flood, regional means large floods which have previously occurred or which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The regional flood generally has an average frequency of the 100 year recurrence interval flood. 
(73)  Floodway means that portion of the flood plain, including the channel, which is reasonably required to convey the regional flood waters. Floods of less frequent recurrence are usually contained completely within the floodway. 
(74)  Floodway fringe means that portion of the flood plain, excluding the floodway, where development may be allowed under certain restrictions. 
(75)  Floor area, gross means the total square feet of all main and accessory buildings which are enclosed, measured from the exterior building face or from the centerline of common walls separating building units. 
(76)  Reserved. 
(77)  Reserved. 
(78)  Food processing means the preparation, storage for processing of food products. Examples of these activities include bakeries, dairies, canneries and other similar businesses. 
(79)  Funeral home means a building or buildings or part thereof used for human funerals. Such building(s) may contain space and facilities for: 
(a)  Embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial. 
(b)  The performance of autopsies and other related surgical procedures. 
(c)  The storage, display and sale of caskets, cremation urns, monuments and other related funeral supplies as accessory uses. 
(d)  The storage of funeral vehicles. 
(e)  A funeral chapel. 
(80)  Garage, private means an accessory building or part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use and in which no business or industry connected directly or indirectly with the repair or servicing of such motor vehicles is carried on. 
(81)  Gasoline service station means buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. Uses permissible at a gasoline service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobile not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. 
(82)  Reserved. 
(83)  Reserved. 
(84)  Reserved. 
(85)  Reserved. 
(86)  Reserved. 
(87)  Group Home For The Handicapped (see also family) means a dwelling shared by four or more handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the resident to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term handicapped shall mean having: 
(a)  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; 
(b)  A record of having such an impairment; 
(c)  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
However, handicapped shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term group home for the handicapped shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment center, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. 
(88)  Home occupation means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that no more than one person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than thirty-five percent (35%) of floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding four square feet in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. No traffic shall be generated by the conduct of such home occupation and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off-street parking requirements as specified in this Zoning Ordinance, and shall not be located in a required front yard. 
(89)  Industrialized Unit means a building unit or assembly of closed construction fabricated in an off-site facility, that is substantially self-sufficient as a unit or as a part of a greater structure, and that requires transportation to the site of intended use. Industrialized Unit includes units installed on the site as independent units, as part of a group of units, or incorporated with standard construction methods to form a completed structural entity. Industrialized Unit would not include a manufactured or mobile home as defined. 
(90)  Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, gas, trash, waste, batteries, paper or rubber, junked, dismantled or wrecked, automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials. 
(91)  Junk yard means an establishment or place of business, which is maintained or operated for the purpose of storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and includes garbage dumps and sanitary landfills. It shall also include scrap metal processing facilities which are located within one thousand feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of a highway or street, and any site, location or premises on which are kept two or more junk motor vehicles as defined in ORC 311.301 whether or not for a commercial purpose. 
(92)  Loading space, off-street means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. All off-street loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 
(93)  Location map . See vicinity map . 
(94)  Lot means a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
(a)  A single lot of record; 
(b)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(c)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record. 

(95)  Lot coverage means the ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. 
(96)  Lot frontage shall be the portion at the street or road right-of-way line. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to street or road right-of-way lines shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under yard in this section. Also see Lot Measurements, Width . 
(97)  Lot, minimum area of . The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street. 
(98)  Lot measurements . A lot shall be measured as follows: 
(a)  Depth means the distance between the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(b)  Width means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the minimum required building setback line. 
(99)  Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
(100)  Lot types . Terminology used in this Zoning Ordinance with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through lots is as follows: 
(a)  Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(b)  Interior lot means a lot with only one frontage on a street. 
(c)  Through lot means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
(d)  Reversed frontage lot means a lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot. 

(101)  Major Commercial means a grouping of more than four office uses or personal service uses on a single site with common parking facilities. 
(102)  Reserved. 
(103)  Reserved. 
(104)  Reserved. 
(105)  Reserved. 
(106)  Reserved. 
(107)  Reserved. 
(108)  Major Retail See Shopping Centers. 
(109)  Major thoroughfare plan means the portion of comprehensive plan adopted by the City Planning Commission indicating the general location recommended for arterial, collector and local thoroughfares within the appropriate jurisdiction. 
(110)  Manufactured Home means any non-self-propelled vehicle transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, and which bears a label certifying that it is built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards. 
(111)  Manufactured Home Park means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes are located for residential use, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended to be used as a part of the facilities of such park. 
(112)  Manufacturing, heavy means major manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, research and testing establishments which may require large sites, extensive community services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation; have large open storage and service areas; generate heavy traffic; and create no nuisance discernible beyond the district boundary (See Section 1135.16). 
(113)  Manufacturing, light means manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, research and testing or other establishments which are clean, quiet, and free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as smoke, noise, odor, dust; operate within enclosed structures; and generate little industrial traffic and no nuisances (See Section 1135.15). 
(114)  Marquee means a permanent structure fastened entirely to the building and projecting from the wall above an entrance and extending over the street right-of-way to provide shelter for automobile passenger loading and unloading entrance. 
(115)  Mini-storage, public means a building or group of buildings designed and used solely for the purpose of leasing interior space for the storage of personal property, household items and the inventory of commercial businesses where storage units are individually leased or rented and where access to storage units is infrequent. Outdoor storage and the storage of junk, explosives, flammable materials and other noxious or dangerous materials are specifically prohibited. 
(116)  Mobile Home means any non-self-propelled vehicle so designed, constructed, reconstructed, or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected to utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks, or other temporary foundation and used or so construed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and exceeding a gross weight of four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds and an overall length of thirty (30) feet, and not in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(117)  Mobile Home Park means any site, or tract of land under single ownership, upon which three or more mobile homes used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes; including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the facilities of such park. 

(118)  Motor Vehicle Salvage Facility means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated for buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
(119)  Multi-Family Rental Office/Management Site means a residential apartment structure, permitted in multi-family residential districts, that is used by an apartment owner, employee or realtor to demonstrate construction and to display built-in amenities to prospective apartment tenants and to promote the rental or lease of apartment units. The rental office may be staffed and furnished. 
(120)  Noncommercial recreation means any business which is operated as a recreational enterprise, either publicly or privately owned, for non-profit. Examples include, but are not limited to: fishing areas, parks, archery ranges, etc. 
(121)  Nonconformities means a building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated. 
(122)  Nude or state of nudity means a state of dress or undress that exposes to view: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(123)  Nursery, nursing home means a home or facility for the care and treatment of babies, children, pensioners or elderly people. 
(124)  Offices means quasi-commercial uses which may often be transitional between retail business and/or manufacturing, and residential uses. Office business generally accommodates such occupations as administrative, executive, professional, accounting, clerical, drafting, etc. Institutional offices of a charitable, philanthropic or religious or educational nature are also included in this classification. 
(125)  Open space means an area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming pools and tennis courts, any other recreational facilities that the Planning Commission deems permissive. Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation and the like shall not be included. 
(126)  Parking space, off-street means an area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 

(127)  Performance bond or surety bond means an agreement by a subdivider or developer with the City for the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider's agreement. 
(128)  Reserved. 
(129)  Reserved. 
(130)  Person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. (As referenced in Section 1123.01 of the City Planning and Zoning Code). 
(131)  Personal services means any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barber shops, beauty parlors and similar activities. 
(132)  Planned unit development means an area of land in which a variety of housing types and subordinate commercial and industrial facilities are accommodated in a preplanned environment under more flexible standards, such as lot sizes and setbacks, then those restrictions that would normally apply under these regulations. The procedure for approval of such development contains requirements in additional to those of the standard subdivision, such as building design principles and landscaping plans. 

(132-A)  Portable Storage Container A moving and/or storage service whereby a company delivers and leaves a storage container onsite for a customer to pack. The storage container is then picked up and moved to a company warehouse and/or the. customer's destination for unpacking and subsequent removal. 
(133)  Printing and publishing means any business publishing of newspapers, magazines, brochures, business cards and similar activities either for profit or non-profit. 
(134)  Public service facility means the erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance of buildings, power plants or substations, water treatment plants or pumping station, sewage disposal or pumping plants, and other similar public service structures by a public utility, by a railroad, whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public or private water and sewage service. 
(135)  Public uses means public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service facilities. 
(136)  Public way means an alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway. right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk, bicycle path or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated whether improved or not. 
(137)  Quasi-public use means churches, parochial schools, hospitals and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic or non-profit nature. 
(138)  Recreation, commercial means any business which is operated as a recreational enterprise, either publicly or privately owned, for profit. Examples include, but are not limited to: golf courses, arcades, bowling alleys, theaters, etc. 
(139)  Recreation, noncommercial means any business which is operated as a recreational enterprise, either publicly or privately owned, for non-profit. Examples include, but are not limited to: fishing areas, parks, archery ranges, etc. 
(140)  Recreational vehicle means a vehicle type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use only, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: boat, travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, and motor home. 
(141)  Residential Model Home means a residential structure, permitted in all residential districts that is used by a licensed home builder/developer, real estate workers or realtor to demonstrate construction, display built-in amenities and color selection charts to prospective home buyers and promote the sale or lease of housing units. The model home may be staffed and furnished. 
(142)  Restrictive as used in this chapter refers to zoning districts and their respective permitted uses for most restrictive to least restrictive as follows: Low Density Residential (SR), (R-1); Medium Density Residential (R-2); High Density Residential (R-3); Low Density Multi-Family (R-4); High Density Multi-Family (R-5); Agricultural Residential (A-R); Estate Residential (ER); Office-Residential (O-R); Business Residential (B-R); Neighborhood Commercial (NC); Hospital Medical (HMD); Service Business (B-1); Central Business (B-3); Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC); Special District 1 (SD1); Light Manufacturing (M-1); and Heavy Manufacturing (M-2). Conditional uses in a district shall be deemed less restrictive than permitted uses in that same district. 
(143)  Right-of-way means a strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped area, viaducts and bridges. 
(144)  Seat . For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each twenty-four lineal inches of benches, pews or space for loose chairs. 
(145)  Semi-nude means a state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the human genitals, anus, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks. 
(146)  Service business means any profit-making activity which renders services primarily to other commercial or industrial enterprises, or which services and repairs appliances and machines used in homes and businesses. 
(147)  Reserved. 
(148)  Reserved. 
(149)  Reserved. 
(150)  Reserved. 
(151)  Setback line means a line established by the Zoning Ordinance generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building, other than accessory building, or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in such Zoning Ordinance. 
(152)  Sewers, central or group means an approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and disposal system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community or region. 
(153)  Sewers, on-site means a septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction. 
(154)  Sexually Oriented Business Establishment means a commercial establishment including adult cabaret, adult store, or adult theater primarily engaged in presenting persons who appear nude/semi-nude, live performances, films or other visual representations, adult booths or sale or display of adult material. 
(a)  Adult cabaret. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following: 
i.  Persons who appear nude or semi-nude. 
ii.  Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
iii.  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(b)  Adult store. Any commercial establishment that: 
i.  Contains one or more adult booths; 
ii.  As a substantial or significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or 
iii.  Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials. 
(c)  Adult theater. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(155)  Shopping Center means a grouping of more than four retail business and service uses on a single site with common parking facilities. 
(156)  Sidewalk means that portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. 
(157)  Sign means any device designated to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(a)  Ground sign means a display sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground surface. 
(b)  Illuminated sign means any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light. 
(c)  Lighting device sign means any light, string of lights or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign. 
(d)  Marquee sign means a display sign attached to or hung from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot line. 
(e)  Off-premises sign means any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity or services sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(f)  On-premises sign means any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(g)  Pole sign means any sign which is erected on a pole or poles, which is wholly or partially independent of any building for support. 
(h)  Projecting sign means a display sign which is attached directly to the building wall and which extends more than fifteen inches from the face of the wall. 
(i)  Roof sign means a display sign which is erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of the building. 
(j)  Temporary sign means a display sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric or other light temporary material with or without a structural frame, intended for a limited period of display, including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations. 
(k)  Wall sign means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall and which extends not more than fifteen inches from the face of the wall. 
(158)  Site Obscuring Structure means opaque or having such qualities as to constitute a complete visual barrier to persons outside the perimeter of the site obscuring object. A fence, which partially obscures a site, shall not be considered site obscuring if it has maintained at least 40% transparency. 
(159)  Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility means a facility wherein food and/or beverage is produced and is: sold on a wholesale and/or retail basis; distributed; and/or consumed on the premises. This may include but is not limited to a winery, brew pub, micro-brewery, distillery, coffee roaster, bakery, charcuterie, cheese making and/or other facilities producing crafted alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages and/or artisan food. 
(160)  Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed. 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(161)  Specified Sexual Activities means any of the following: 
(a)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(b)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(c)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(d)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence. 
(e)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in divisions a. through b. of this definition. 
(162)  Story means that part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above. 
(163)  Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structure includes, but is not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and microwave antennas, whether receiving or transmitting. 
(164)  Supply yards means a commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain and similar goods. 
(165)  Sweepstakes Terminal Caf and/or Skill Game Room means any individual premises upon which any device as defined in Section 722.03 is located for the use or entertainment of the public, whether or not such premises have other business purposes of any nature whatsoever. 
(166)  (a)  Private swimming pool means any structure that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational use and which is available only to the family and guests of the property owner. This includes inground, aboveground, portable and inflatable swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
(b)  Public swimming pool means any outdoor structure, chamber, or tank containing a body of water for swimming, diving, recreational use, or sanctioned event that is intended to be used collectively for swimming, diving, recreational use, or sanctioned event and is operated by any person whether as the owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for use. 
(167)  Transient lodgings means a building in which lodging, or boarding and lodging, are provided and offered to the public for compensation. As such it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, rooming house, lodging house or dormitory which is herein separately defined. Examples include: hotel, motel and apartment house. 
(168)  Transport terminals means any business, structure or premises which primarily receives or distributes goods. 
(169)  Thoroughfare, street or road . The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows: 

(a)  Alley means a minor street used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street. 
(b)  Arterial street means a highway primarily for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volume of traffic, usually on a continuous route. 
(c)  Collector street means a thoroughfare, whether within a residential, industrial, commercial or other type of development, which primarily carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation routes within residential subdivisions. 
(d)  Cul-de-sac means a local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other terminating in a vehicular turnaround. 
(e)  Dead-end street means a street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future. 
(f)  Local street means a street primarily for providing access to residential or other abutting property. 
(g)  Loop street means a type of local street, each end of which terminates at an intersection with the same arterial or collector street, and whose principal radius points of the 180 degree system of turns are not more than 1,000 feet from such arterial or collector street, nor normally more than 600 feet from each other. 
(h)  Marginal access street means a local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (Also called frontage street.") 
(170)  Through lot . See lot types . 
(171)  Transportation, Director of means the Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation. 
(172)  Use means the specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(173)  Variance means a modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(174)  Veterinary animal hospital and/or animal clinic excluding outside kennels and boarding stables means a place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention. Any such animal held for observation, recovery or boarding shall be housed within the hospital or clinic building. Any such animal hospital or animal clinic shall be operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
(175)  Veterinary animal hospital and/or animal clinic including outside kennels and boarding stables or premises for the boarding of pets or other animals means a place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and/or recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary activity. Any such animal hospital or animal clinic shall be operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
(176)  Vicinity map means a drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in order to better locate and orient the area in question. 
(177)  Walkway means a public way, four feet or more in width, for pedestrian use only, whether along the side of a road or not. 
(178)  Warehousing, public means a person or business whose primary purpose and profit motive is the receiving, storing and shipping of merchandise or commodities for one or more unrelated persons or businesses. 
(179)  Warehousing, private means a person or business whose primary concern and profit motive is manufacture, assembly or sale of finished products and who needs to receive, store and ship merchandise or commodities only for purposes of supporting the primary concern. 
(180)  Wholesale means business establishments that generally sell commodities in large quantities or by the piece to retailers, jobbers, other wholesale establishments or manufacturing establishments. These commodities are basically for further resale, for use in the fabrication of a product, or for use by a business service. 
(181)  Yard means a required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
(a)  Yard, front means a yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building. 
(b)  Yard, rear means a yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of the lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building. 
(c)  Yard, side means a yard extending from the principal building to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing the front and rear yards. 
(182)  Zoning certificate means a document issued by the Zoning Inspector authorizing the occupancy or use of a building or structure or the actual use of lots or lands in accordance with the previously issued zoning permit. 
(183)  Zoning permit means a document issued by the Zoning Inspector authorizing the use of lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and the characteristics of the uses. 
(Ord. 25-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 21-02. Passed 6-13-2002; Ord. 50-07. Passed 10-11-2007; Ord. 15-10. Passed 5-27-2010; Ord. 27-12. Passed 5-10-2012; Ord. 56-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 11-15. Passed 3-12-2015; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016; Ord. 41-16. Passed 10-24-2016.) 
CHAPTER 1125. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision enforcement and penalty, Ch. 1113. 
State Law reference- Violation of zoning ordinances, ORC 713.13. 

Sec. 1125.01. - Zoning permits required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be established or changed in use without a permit therefor, issued by the Zoning Inspector. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Permits will also be issued if the Zoning Inspector receives a written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal, conditional use or variance, or from Council approving a Planned Unit Development District, as provided by this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.02. - Application for zoning permit. 
The application for zoning permit: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application; 
(D)  Shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within six (6) months or substantially completed within eighteen (18) months. 
(Ord. 30-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1125.03. - Approval of zoning permit. 
Within fifteen days after the receipt of an application, the Zoning Inspector shall either approve or disapprove the application. All zoning permits shall, however, be conditional upon the commencement of work within six months. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Inspector, after the Zoning Inspector has marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. One copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Inspector. The Zoning Inspector shall issue a placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the fact that the permit has been issued in accordance with the information contained on the approved application for zoning permit and the plans approved with the application. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.04. - Submitting permit to Director, Ohio Department of Transportation. 
Before any zoning permit is issued affecting any land within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed new highway or a highway for which changes are proposed as described in the certification to local officials by the Director, Ohio Department of Transportation, or any land within a radius of 500 feet from the point of intersection of such centerline with any public road or highway, the Zoning Inspector shall give notice by registered mail to the Director that he shall not issue a zoning permit for 120 days from the date the notice is received by the Director. If the Director notifies the Zoning Inspector that he shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the Zoning Inspector shall refuse to issue the zoning permit. If the Director notifies the Zoning Inspector that acquisition at this time is not in the public interest, or upon the expiration of the 120 day period or any extension thereof agreed upon by the Director and the property owner, the Zoning Inspector shall, if the application is in conformance with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, issue the zoning permit. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.05. - Expiration of zoning permit. 
If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within six months of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire; it shall be revoked by the Zoning Inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. If the work described in any zoning permit has not been substantially completed within one and one-half years of the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire and be revoked by the Zoning Inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new zoning permit has been obtained or extension granted. Extensions, if granted, shall be in six month increments, not to exceed one and one-half years. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.06. - Certificate of compliance required. 
No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued therefor by the Zoning Inspector. Certificates of compliance shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of the Planning and Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.07. - Temporary certificate of compliance. 
A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued by the Zoning Inspector for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.08. - Record of zoning permits and certificates of compliance. 
The Zoning Inspector shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and certificates of compliance and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.09. - Failure to obtain zoning permit or certificate of compliance. 
Failure to obtain a zoning permit or certificate of compliance is a violation and punishable under Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.10. - Construction and use requirements. 
Zoning permits or certificates of compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Inspector authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized is a violation and punishable as provided in Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.11. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
Council shall by ordinance establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances, conditional use permits, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance requiring investigations, inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Inspector, and may be altered or amended only by Council. Until all applicable, fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.12. - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever a violation of this Zoning Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Inspector. The Zoning Inspector shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by Chapter 1129. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1125.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or violates any condition or safeguard established in any sections shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such violation continues after receipt of a violation notice shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 26-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
CHAPTER 1127. - NONCONFORMITIES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Variances,  1129.12 et seq. 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses, retroactive measures, ORC 713.15. 

Sec. 1127.01. - Intent. 
Within the districts established by the Zoning Ordinance or future amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, uses of land, structures and uses of structures and land in combination which were lawful before this Zoning Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance or future amendments. It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.02. - Incompatibility of nonconformities. 
Nonconformities are declared by this Zoning Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination, shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Zoning Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.03. - Avoidance of undue hardship. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction, was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be carried out diligently. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.04. - Single nonconforming lots of record. 
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variances of requirements listed in Chapters 1137 and 1139, other than lot area or lot width, shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in Sections 1129.09 through 1129.18. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.05. - Nonconforming lots of record in combination. 
If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and no portion of such parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Zoning Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.06. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
(A)  Where, at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Zoning Ordinance, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, except that on a nonconforming lot on which a single-family dwelling exists, accessory buildings will be allowed in accordance with Section 1139.24. 
(2)  No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned for more than two years (except when government action impedes access to the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977; Ord. 31-86. Passed 8-28-1986.) 
Sec. 1127.07. - Nonconforming structures. 
(A)  Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions; 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by fire or an act of God, it may be reconstructed as it previously existed. All remaining debris shall be cleared away and disposed of properly within two months of the time of destruction; 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.08. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in combination. 
(A)  If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, the lawful use may' be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Zoning Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land, may, upon appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination is discontinued or abandoned for more than two years (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land, except as stated in Section 1127.07(A)(2). 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.09. - Repairs and maintenance. 
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1127.10. - Uses under conditional use provisions not nonconforming uses. 
Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
CHAPTER 1129. - ADMINISTRATION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Nonconformities, Ch. 1127. 
State Law reference- Establishing a planning commission, ORC 713.01; Planning Commission powers and duties, ORC 713.02, 713.06; appeals from zoning decisions, ORC 713.11; council to hold public hearing, ORC 713.12. 

Sec. 1129.01. - Office of Zoning Inspector created. 
A Zoning Inspector designated by the Mayor shall administer and enforce this Zoning Ordinance. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the Mayor may direct. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.02. - Duties of Zoning Inspector. 
(A)  For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Inspector shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Upon finding that any provision of this Zoning Ordinance is being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for the violation ordering the action necessary to correct such violation; 
(2)  Order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures; 
(3)  Order removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal additions or structural alterations; 
(4)  Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; 
(5)  Take any other action authorized by this Zoning Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of this Zoning Ordinance. This may include the issuance of and action on zoning and certificate of occupancy permits and such similar administrative duties as are permissible under the law. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.03. - Proceedings of Planning Commission. 
The Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs in keeping with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other official actions all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the Commission. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.04. - Duties of Planning Commission. 
(A)  For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance the Commission shall have the following: 
(1)  Initiate proposed amendments to this Zoning Ordinance; 
(2)  Review all proposed amendments to this Zoning Ordinance and make recommendations to Council as specified in Chapter 1131; 
(3)  Review all planned unit developments and make recommendations to Council provided in Chapter 1145; 
(4)  Carry out such other duties as are set forth in the Charter of the Municipality. 
(5)  Conduct a complete review of the Planning and Zoning Code at least every five years beginning in 1991 and to provide recommendations for modification or no modification as appropriate. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.05. - Board of Zoning Appeals created. 
A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby created, which shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the President of Council, with the consent of Council, for a term of five years, except that the initial appointments shall be one member each for one, two, three, four and five year terms. The initial appointments for the two additional members appointed in 2006, shall be one for three and one for five year terms. Each member shall be a resident of the City. Members of the Board may be removed from office by Council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the President of Council, with the consent of Council, for the unexpired term of the member affected. The City Zoning Inspector or designee shall be present when requested, and shall be an ex-officio member of the Board of Zoning Appeals without voting privileges. 
(Ord. 18-06. Passed 5-25-2006.) 
Sec. 1129.06. - Proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs in keeping with this Zoning Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Agenda items must be submitted twenty calendar days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting. Any meeting may be cancelled due to absence of agenda items. All meetings shall be open to the public. The President of Council shall designate a clerk or secretary to prepare packets and keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the Board. 
(Ord. 13-16. Passed 4-28-2016.) 
Sec. 1129.07. - Duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  In exercising its duties, the Board may, as long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Inspector from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of five members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,: requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Zoning Ordinance or to effect any variation in the application of this Zoning Ordinance. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance the Board has the following specific responsibilities: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Inspector; 
(2)  To authorize such variances from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to the special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Zoning Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done; 
(3)  To grant conditional use permits as specified in the Official Schedule of District Regulations and under the conditions specified in Chapter 1137 and such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 18-06. Passed 5-25-2006.) 
Sec. 1129.08. - Duties on matters of appeal. 
It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Inspector, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Inspector, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board shall be to the courts as provided by law. Any such appeal shall be made within ten days of the Board's written decision. It is further the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that the duties of Council in connection with this Zoning Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this Zoning Ordinance. Under this Zoning Ordinance Council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Zoning Ordinance as provided by law; approving or rejecting planned unit development projects and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 1125.11. Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted to prevent any official of the City from appealing a decision of the Board to the courts as provided in the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.09. - Procedure and requirements for appeals and variances. 
Appeals and variances shall conform to the procedures and requirements of Sections 1129.10-1129.18 of this Zoning Ordinance. As specified in Section 1129.07, the Board of Zoning Appeals has appellate jurisdiction relative to appeals and variances. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.10. - Appeals. 
(A)  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this Zoning Ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Inspector. 
(B)  Such appeal shall be taken within twenty days after the decision of filing, with the Zoning Inspector and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is being taken. 
(C)  Application for Appeal: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(D)  The Zoning Inspector shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Ord. 31-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1129.11. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Inspector from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.12. - Variances. 
(A)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance except as noted in subsection (B) below. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(B)  Applications for variances shall follow the procedures outlined in Sections 1129.09-1129.18. In a Service Business District (B-1) the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances to lot coverage and setbacks after considering at least the following in addition to the other standards set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The case in question is in fact in a Service Business District (B-1). 
(2)  That a literal enforcement of the provisions of Section 1137.22 would render the case in question impractical or inefficient and not in the best interests of the City or the applicant. Conditions that could cause such situations may include: 
(a)  Lots of record with less than the required area or frontage. 
(b)  Unusual topographical or physical features such as steep slopes, rivers, streams or runs, existing easements or rights-of-way and so forth. 
(3)  Adjacent properties that are similar in nature to the proposal in terms of lot coverage and setbacks. 
The burden of establishing unique characteristics in support of such a request shall rest upon the applicant. The intent of this paragraph (1129.12(B)) is to provide a mechanism for flexibility and more efficient uses of parcels that otherwise would be difficult to develop or improve through literal interpretation of the requirements of Section 1137.22. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.13. - Application and standards for variances. 
(A)  Applications for review by the Board of Zoning Appeals for variances: 
(1)  Shall be filed in accordance with Chapter 1129; 
(2)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(3)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(4)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(5)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(B)  In addition to the required application and supplemental information, the applicant shall provide a narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to the following standards: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(4)  That the authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance or the public interest. 
(C)  A variance shall not be granted unless the Board makes specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it, which support conclusions that the standards and conditions imposed by subsection (B) hereof have been met by the applicant. 
(Ord. 32-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1129.14. - Supplementary conditions and safeguards. 
(A)  Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant an appeal or variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Zoning Ordinance in such district. In granting an appeal or variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and punishable under Section 1125.99. 
(B)  Any variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall expire if not so used within two years and the permit for such variance shall become void. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.15. - Public hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five days after the receipt of an application for an appeal or variance from the Zoning Inspector or an applicant. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.16. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
Before holding the public hearing required in Section 1129.15, notice of such hearing shall be given in one newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten days before the date of such hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, and the nature of the proposed appeal or variance. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.17. - Notice to parties in interest. 
Before holding the public hearing required in Section 1129.15, written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the clerk or secretary designated to keep the minutes, by first-class mail, at least ten days before the day of the hearing to all parties of interest. Parties of interest shall include property owners contiguous to or directly across the street from the property concerned. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in Section 1129.16. 
(Ord. 11-13. Passed 3-14-2013.) 
Sec. 1129.18. - Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The public hearing may be extended to another date by mutual agreement of the board and the applicant. Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the public hearing required in Section 1129.15, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions as specified in Section 1129.14, or disapprove the request for appeal or variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance that will make possible a reasonable use of the land, building or structure. Appeals from Board decisions shall be made in the manner specified in Section 1129.08. 
(Ord. 18-06. Passed 5-25-2006.) 
Sec. 1129.19 - Procedure and requirements for approval of conditional use permits. 
Conditional uses shall conform to the procedures and requirements of Sections 1129.20-1129.26. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.20. - General. 
It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of uses are appearing daily, and that many of these and some other more conventional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that each specific use must be considered individually. These specific uses as they are conditionally permitted under the provisions of Chapter 1137, shall follow the procedures and requirements set forth in Sections 1129.21-1129.26. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.21. - Application for conditional use. 
Applications for review by the Board of Zoning Appeals for conditional uses: 
(A)  Shall be filed in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 1129; 
(B)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(C)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(D)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(E)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 33-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1129.22. - General standards applicable to all conditional uses. 
The Board shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location: 
(A)  Is in fact a conditional use as established under the provisions of Chapter 1137 and appears on the Official Schedule of District Regulations adopted by Section 1137.02 for the zoning district involved; 
(B)  Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives, or with any specific objective of the City's Comprehensive Plan and/or the Zoning Ordinance; 
(C)  Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area; 
(D)  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses; 
(E)  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services; 
(F)  Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community; 
(G)  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes or odors; 
(H)  Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.23. - Supplementary conditions and safeguards. 
In granting any conditional use, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and punishable under Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.24. - Procedure for hearing, notice. 
Upon receipt of the application for a conditional use permit specified in Section 1129.21, the Board shall hold a public hearing, publish notice in a newspaper, and give written notice to all parties in interest according to the procedures specified in Sections 1129.15-1129.17. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.25. - Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The public hearing may be extended to another date by mutual agreement of the board and the applicant. Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the public hearing required in Section 1129.24, the Board shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions as specified in Section 1129.23, or disapprove the application as presented. If the application is approved, or approved with modification, the Board shall direct the Zoning Inspector to issue a conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the Board for approval. If the application is disapproved by the Board the applicant may seek relief through the Court of Common Pleas. Appeals from Board decisions shall be made in the manner specified in Section 1129.08. 
(Ord. 18-06. Passed 5-25-2006.) 
Sec. 1129.26. - Expiration of conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular conditional use and such permit shall automatically expire if, for any reason, the conditional use shall cease for more than two years. 
(Ord. 48-95. Passed 9-28-1995.) 
Sec. 1129.27. - Limitations on refiling of applications. 
Where an application for Appeal, Conditional Use or Variance has been denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Design Review Board, no new application for the same purpose shall be filed within six (6) months from the date the previous denial became final, unless all of the following conditions are met in the following order: 
(A)  The applicant submits in writing to the Chair of the Board which rendered the original decision for denial, a request which explains the reason to refile an application for the same purpose. 
(B)  Within 10 working days of the submitted written request, the Chair of the Board which rendered the original decision for denial, for causes substantially documented, grants permission to do so. 
(C)  The applicant submits a complete application and pays all applicable fees by the application deadline for the next available meeting date to have the request heard by the Board. 
(Ord. 1-14. Passed 1-23-2014.) 
CHAPTER 1131. - AMENDMENT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Council may amend districting or zoning, ORC 713.10; Council to hold public hearing, ORC 713.12 

Sec. 1131.01. - Procedure for amendment or district changes. 
This Zoning Ordinance may be amended utilizing the procedures specified in Sections 1131.02 through 1131.13. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.02. - General. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practices require, Council may by ordinance, after receipt of recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission, and subject to procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and boundaries or classification of property. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.03. - Initiation of zoning amendments. 
(A)  Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in one of the following ways: 
(1)  By adoption of a motion by the Planning Commission; 
(2)  By adoption of a resolution by Council; 
(3)  By the filing of an application with the Zoning Inspector by at least one owner or representative or agent for at least one owner of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by such amendment. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.04. - Zoning amendment application. 
Application for amendments to the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of this Zoning Ordinance by Section 1131.01: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(D)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 34-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1131.05. - Transmittal to Planning Commission. 
Immediately after the adoption of a resolution by Council or the filing of an application by at least one owner or agent or representative for at least one owner of property, such resolution or application shall be transmitted to the Commission. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.06. - Submitting amendment to Director, Ohio Department of Transportation. 
Before any zoning amendment is approved affecting any land within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed new highway or highway for which changes are proposed as described in the certification to local officials by the Director, Ohio Department of Transportation, or within a radius of 500 feet from the point of the intersection of such centerline with any public road or highway, the Commission shall give notice by registered or certified mail to the Director. The Commission may proceed as required by law, however, Council shall not approved the amendment for 120 days from the date the notice is received by the Director. If the Director notifies the City that he shall proceed to acquire the land needed then the City shall refuse to approve the rezoning. If the Director notifies the City that the acquisition at this time is not in the public interest or upon the expiration of the 120 day period or any extension thereof agreed upon by the Director and the property owner, Council shall proceed as required by law. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.07. - Recommendation by Planning Commission. 
Within sixty days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation to Council. The Planning Commission may recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.08. - Public hearing by Council. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission, Council shall schedule a public hearing. Such hearing shall be held not more than fifty days from the date such recommendation is first placed on the Council agenda. The recommendation shall be placed on the Council agenda for the next stated meeting after being delivered to the Clerk of Council. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.09. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
Notice of the public hearing required in Section 1131.08 shall be given by Council by at least one publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall be published at least thirty days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing and a summary of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.10. - Notice to property owners by Council. 
If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk, by first class mail, at least twenty days before the day of the public hearing to all owners of property within, contiguous to and directly across the street from such area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted to the address of such owners appearing in the County Auditor's current tax list or the Treasurer's mailing list and to such other list or lists that may be specified by Council. The failure to deliver the notification, as provided in this section shall not invalidate any such amendment. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in Section 1131.09. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.11. - Action by Council. 
Within forty-five days after the public hearing required by Section 1131.08, Council shall take final action on the recommendation of the Planning Commission. A vote to amend the recommendation must receive a three-fourths affirmative vote of all members of Council. The vote to adopt the recommendation of the Planning Commission, whether amended or not, must receive a majority vote of all members of Council. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.12. - Effective date and referendum. 
(A)  Such amendment adopted by Council shall become effective thirty days after the date of such adoption unless within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance there is presented to the City Clerk a petition, signed by a number of qualified voters residing in the City equal to not less than ten percent of the total vote cast in such area at the last preceding general election at which a Governor was elected, requesting Council to submit the zoning amendment to the electors of the City for approval or rejection at the next general election. 
(B)  No amendment for which such referendum vote has been requested shall be put into effect unless a majority of the vote cast on the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon certification by the Board of Elections that the amendment has been approved by the voters, it shall take immediate effect. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1131.13. - Annexation. 
All land annexed to the City subsequent to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance shall remain subject to the previous Township zoning district until such time as the Official Zoning Map is amended according to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 27-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
CHAPTER 1133. - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Basis of districts, ORC 713.10. 

Sec. 1133.01. - Official Zoning Map. 
The districts established in this chapter as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted as part of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1133.02. - Identification of the Official Zoning Map. 
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the President of Council and attested to and kept secure by the Clerk of Council. 
Sec. 1133.03. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(A)  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so. indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map; 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of such railroad line; 
(5)  Where the boundary of a district follows Mill Creek, such boundary line shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the stream. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
CHAPTER 1135. - DISTRICTS ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- District regulations, Chs. 1137, 1139. 
State Law reference- Division into districts, ORC 713.06, 713.10; basis of zoning districts, ORC 713.10. 

Sec. 1135.01. - Intent. 
(A)  The following zoning districts are hereby established for the City of Marysville, Ohio. For the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance, the zoning districts have been formulated to realize the general purpose as set forth in the preamble of original Ordinance 1005-77. In addition, the specific purpose of each zoning district shall be as stated. 
(B)  Refer to Chapter 1137, Official Schedule of District Regulations, for a listing of permitted and Conditional Uses and for minimum or maximum requirements. References and definitions are those in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code as revised in 1987 by the Federal Office of Management and Budget. 
(C)  When an enterprise or land use has multiple SIC codes, and one or more of those codes is a permitted use in a less restrictive district as defined in Section 1123.01(B)(142), the less restrictive zoning shall apply. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.02. - Agricultural Residential District (A-R). 
The purpose of this district is to provide land which is suitable or used for agriculture, conservation, very low density residential and quasi-public purposes. Very low density residential land use refers to farm housing units and isolated residential development not qualifying as a major subdivision under the City subdivision regulations. Single family dwellings should not exceed one dwelling unit per gross acre. On-site water and sewer facilities are permitted, provided such facilities comply with County Health Department regulations. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.021. - Estate Residential District (ER). 
The purpose of the Estate Residential District is to provide a transition between more rural areas of the City of Marysville, and more urbanized portions of the City. These areas are expected to be served by public utilities and to develop in a lower density development pattern. Single family dwellings should not exceed one dwelling Unit per gross acre. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.022. - Suburban Residential District (SR). 
The purpose of the Suburban Residential District is to encourage and provide for the orderly development of lower density single family homes and customary supporting residential facilities, such as public park lands. Single family dwellings should not exceed two dwelling unit per gross acre. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.03. - Low Density Residential District (R-1). 
The purpose of the R-1 District is to permit the establishment of low density single family dwellings not to exceed three and one half dwelling units per gross acre. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.04. - Medium Density Residential District (R-2). 
The purpose of the R-2 District is to permit the establishment of medium density single family dwellings not to exceed four dwelling units per gross acre. This district is also designed to permit low density multi-family dwellings (R-4) as a conditional use and the conversion of large, older houses as a conditional use in well-established neighborhoods to low density multifamily units. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.05. - High Density Single Family Residential (R-3). 
The purpose of the R-3 District is to permit the establishment of high density single family dwellings not to exceed five units per gross acre. Further, this district is intended to meet the special housing needs of a certain segment of the community, specifically, lower income or elderly. Zoning large tracts of land under this district should be avoided. This district is also designed to permit low density multi-family dwellings as a conditional use and conversion of large older houses as a conditional use in well-established neighborhoods to low density multi-family units. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. 
(Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.06. - Low Density Multi-family District (R-4). 
The purpose of the R-4 District is to permit the establishment of low density multi-family dwellings not to exceed eight units per gross acre. Such a district may be used as a transition from High Density Multi-Family districts or non-residential districts to single family districts. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.07. - High Density Multi-family District (R-5). 
The purpose of the R-5 District is to permit the establishment of high density multi-family dwellings not to exceed eight dwelling units per gross acre. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. Common use open space that will give benefit to the occupants of the dwelling units may also be required. 
(Ord. 27-99. Passed 8-26-1999.) 
Sec. 1135.08. - Office-Residential (OR). 
(A)  The purpose of the Office Residential is to accommodate a mixture of residential and office uses. Residential and office uses may be mixed in the same building or structure. This district should be viewed as a transitional district between residential districts and other business districts. Retail businesses or service businesses generating high volumes of traffic or outside storage of vehicles and/or materials should be discouraged. 
(B)  This district is planned as the primary district for transition from commercial or manufacturing to residential when appropriate. Residential use should not exceed fifty percent (50%) of land use in any O-R Zoning District. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 52-05. Passed 9-22-2005.) 
Sec. 1135.09. - Business-Residential District (BR). 
The purpose of the business-residential district is to accommodate a mixture of residential and business uses. Residential and business uses may be mixed in the same building or structure. A variety of business uses which are compatible with the residential area are permitted. This district is planned for an area in transition from residential to commercial. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.10. - Service Business District (B-1). 
The purpose of the service business district is to provide land for retail and personal service establishments not normally available in the Central Business District; do offer convenience type goods and services for the immediate area; do not particularly contribute to the design of a unified business district; may depend on drive in business and therefore require a location along or near a major thoroughfare or intersection. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5-18 ,  I(App. A), adopted Jan. 22, 2018, reserved  1135.11, which pertained to Central Business District (B-3) and derived from Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997. 
Sec. 1135.12. - Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC). 
(A)  The purpose of the Traffic Oriented Commercial District is to encourage and provide areas for orderly development of commercial uses that generate high traffic volumes and an increasing probability of vehicle traffic congestion on abutting public roadways. These uses generally require larger tracts of land used for parking and/or vehicle storage and will normally service regional needs as opposed to neighborhood needs. 
(B)  Refer to Chapter 1137, Official Schedule of District Regulations, for a listing of permitted and Conditional Uses and for minimum requirements. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.13. - Hospital Medical District (HMD). 
The purpose of the Hospital Medical District is designed to provide for compact hospital-medical facilities development with related hospital oriented uses that complement each other in terms of the functions being performed. This district is mapped to recognize the need for expansion of present hospital facilities and to provide area for hospital related medical office facilities. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.14. - Manufacturing districts. 
Manufacturing districts are established to meet the purposes set forth in Sections 1135.15 and 1135.16. Purposes or uses that are not manufacturing such as residential of any type, retail (unless accessory or directly related to primary use) and so forth are prohibited. Permitted and conditional uses in manufacturing districts are shown on the District Regulations and referenced the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code as revised in 1987 by the Federal Office of Management and Budget. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.15. - Light Manufacturing District (M-1). 
The purpose of the light manufacturing district is to provide land for manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, research and testing or other establishments which are clean, quiet, and free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as smoke, noise, odor, dust; operate within enclosed structures; and generate little industrial traffic and no nuisances. Heavy manufacturing is prohibited. Retail or other activities compatible with the Light Manufacturing uses are permitted. Refer to Chapter 1137 Official Schedule of District Regulations for a listing of permitted and conditional uses and to Chapter 1139 Supplementary District Regulations for specific requirements for the Light Manufacturing District. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.16. - Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2). 
The purpose of the heavy manufacturing district is to provide land for major manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, research and testing establishments which may require large sites, extensive community services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation; have large open storage and service areas; generate heavy traffic; and create no nuisance discernible beyond the district boundary. Retail or other activities compatible with heavy manufacturing are permitted. Refer to Chapter 1137 Official Schedule of District Regulations for a listing of permitted and conditional uses and to Chapter 1139 Supplementary District Regulations for specific requirements for the Heavy Manufacturing District. 
(Ord. 28-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Sec. 1135.17. - Special District One (SD1). 
The purpose of this district is to recognize the unique combination of a mix of Traffic Oriented Commercial (Section 1135.12) and Light Manufacturing (Section 1135.15) uses, both of which have need for good traffic access and larger tracts of land and which serve regional as well as local needs, are logical uses of land in this area. Refer to Sections 1135.12 and 1135.15 for more specific statements of purpose for Traffic oriented Commercial and Light Manufacturing. 
(Ord. 65-14. Passed 9-11-2014.) 
Sec. 1135.18. - Neighborhood Commercial District (NC). 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for retail, personal or repair service establishments that cater to and can be located in close proximity to residential districts without creating undue vehicular congestion, excessive noise or other objectionable influences. The retail establishments that are to be permitted are those that are primarily engaged in selling merchandise or services for personal or household use. 
(Ord. 46-03. Passed 11-6-2003.) 
Sec. 1135.19. - Government Use District (GOV). 
The purpose of this district is to provide for facilities and uses provided by all levels of government and other public entities along with limited office uses. 
(Ord. 41-08. Passed 10-23-2008.) 
CHAPTER 1136. - HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW DISTRICT(S) AND LANDMARK(S)[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Central Business District,  1135.11; supplementary district regulations, Ch. 1139. 
State Constitution reference- Ohio Constitution, Art. XVIII, Sec. 3. 

Sec. 1136.01. - General statement. 
The City of Marysville, which includes the Central Business District (CBD), contains numerous historic structures and other architectural and special features which are considered assets that establish the character of the community. The Marysville (CBD) is a mixed use area where residential and commercial uses support each other's economic vitality and the historic character is directly linked to the economic health of the business and residential districts. Additional buildings and places that exhibit historic character add meaning and livability to our City. The vitality of historic buildings, structures and areas within the City of Marysville affects the economic, social, historical and cultural health and wellbeing of the community. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.02. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District is to maintain and enhance the distinctive character of the community's historic area(s) by safeguarding the exterior architectural integrity of the various period structures and other historic features within the Design Review District thereby promoting the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors to the community. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.03. - Intent. 
The intent of the Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) is to: 
(A)  Create a unique Overlay District which protects a historically significant area which includes multiple zoning districts. This means that the requirements of this chapter must be met in addition to the established requirements of the underlying use districts. 
(B)  Provide a process of architectural review in reference to historic preservations criteria which would also guide, support and encourage new construction which would be compatible with historic structures. 
(C)  Promote, preserve, and enhance the historic integrity and special features of the District. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.04. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows: 
(A)  Applicant means any person, persons, association, organization, partnership, unit of government, public body or corporation who applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness in order to undertake an environmental change within the District. 
(B)  Architectural character means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure including the type and texture of the light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of an outdoor advertising sign, exterior features means the style, material, size and location of the sign. 
(C)  Board means the Design Review Board of the City of Marysville as established in Chapter 1144. 
(D)  Certificate of Appropriateness means a certificate authorizing any alteration of architectural character or any environmental change within the Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) including the Uptown Marysville Design Review District. 
(E)  District means the Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) including the Historic Uptown Marysville Review District. 
(F)  Environmental change means the construction, modification, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of exterior features of a structure or property subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(G)  Maintenance means the ordinary repair of any structure or property provided such work involves no change in material, design, texture, color or exterior appearance. 
(H)  Landmark A property, structure, or building designated by the Design Review Board to be worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance. 
(I)  Owner means the owner of record, and the term shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
(J)  Preserve or preservation means the process, including maintenance of treating an existing building to arrest the slow future deterioration, stabilize the structure and provide structural safety without changing or adversely affecting the character or appearance of the structure. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.05. - Criteria and establishment of Historic District(s) and Landmark(s). 
(A)  In considering the designation of any area, property, structure, work of art, or similar object in the City of Marysville as an historic district or landmark, the City Planning Commission and City Council shall apply the following criteria: 
(1)  Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristic of the City of Marysville, Union County, the State of Ohio, or the United States of America. 
(2)  Its location as a site of a significant historical event. 
(3)  Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City. 
(4)  Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historic heritage of the City. 
(5)  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type. 
(6)  Its embodiment of elements of architectural design or detail or materials or craftsmanship which represent architecture of significant character, charm, or grandeur. 
(7)  Its unique location or singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or of the City. 
(8)  Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style. 
(B)  Additional Historic district boundaries within the City of Marysville must be eligible for or listed on the National Register of Historic Places or contain locally designated landmarks. 
(1)  The initiation of a proposal for a Historic District may be made only by one or more citizens of the City of Marysville, a City Board, City Commission, City Council or committee. 
(2)  The proposal shall be submitted to the City of Marysville Director of Administration and/or designee. The submission shall include documentation proving the subject property(s) either eligible for or is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(3)  All known legal or equitable property owner(s) of the designated property(s) and abutting property owners shall be notified by mail of the proposal, and their written comments requested. 
(4)  Within twenty (20) days, the City of Marysville Director of Administration and/or designee shall forward the proposal with owner(s) written comments to the Union County Historical Society and City of Marysville Design Review Board for recommendations. 
(5)  After review, the Union County Historical Society and the City of Marysville Design Review Board shall forward their recommendations in writing to the City of Marysville Director of Administration and/or designee. 
(6)  The City of Marysville Director of Administration and/or designee shall forward the proposal with all written comments and recommendations to the City of Marysville Planning Commission for review. 
(7)  The Planning Commission shall review the proposal, the recommendations of the Union County Historical Society, the City of Marysville Design Review Board and the owners' written comments and shall forward them on to City Council with a recommendation. 
(8)  Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation, the City Council shall cause an appropriate ordinance to be prepared, shall schedule public hearings on the proposed legislation and shall cause written notice to be given to the owner or any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property(s) being proposed for designation. 
(9)  City Council shall give due consideration to the findings and recommendations of the Planning Commission, Union County Historical Society, written comments from property owner(s), and to the public hearing comments, in making its determination. 
(10)  After a decision by City Council, the Clerk of Council shall notify all persons known to have a legal or equitable interest in the said property(s). The Planning Commission and the Union County Historical Society shall also be notified of the decision. 
(11)  City Council shall, notwithstanding any provision of this chapter may rescind by ordinance the designation of any area, place, building or structure located within a designated Historic District. 
(12)  The Clerk of Council shall notify any appropriate county and/or state offices after a designation is approved or rescinded. 
No legislation under this section shall be rendered invalid by any failure or alleged failure of the Clerk of Council to provide a prescribed notice, by mail or otherwise, to any person. 
(C)  Maps with delineated boundaries of the following Historic District(s) and/or Landmark(s) are on file with the City of Marysville Clerk of Council. 
Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District, excluding single family properties where the use of that structure will continue as a single family residence from all provisions of this chapter except when a single family property is being proposed demolition. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.06 - Establishment of Historic District(s) and Landmark(s) Design Review Process. 
The Design Review Board, as defined in Chapter 1144, shall review Certificate of Appropriateness applications for this Design Review District and shall ensure that all the provisions of this chapter are enforced. The Design Review Board shall have the following duties: 
(A)  Develop and maintain specific design and color guidelines for the Historic and Landmark District Design Review District. These design and color guidelines shall be reviewed and updated when appropriate. 
(B)  Review the Design Review District code and guidelines and make recommendations to City Council and the City Administration on how to improve the architectural and design environment. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.07. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
(A)  An environmental change within any designated Historic and/or Landmark District including the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness approved by the Board or a fast track Certificate of Appropriateness approval, approved by the Zoning Inspector. A demolition on a single family property shall also be an environmental change and shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness approved by the Board. 
(B)  Applications for the approval of the Certificate of Appropriateness: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(C)  Staff shall review the submitted materials for completeness and shall: 
(1)  Determine if the Certificate of Appropriateness is a fast track application (as defined later in this chapter) or if it is a Design Review Board application. If it is a Design Review Board application, the Zoning Inspector shall place said application on the next appropriate Design Review Board agenda; or 
(2)  Reject incomplete applications and return the fee to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
(Ord. 35-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1136.08. - Projects, work and maintenance not requiring a certificate of appropriateness. 
An environmental change on a structure or on a property within any designated Historic and/or Landmark District including the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District does not require a Certificate of Appropriateness if the: 
(A)  Environmental change which in the view of the Zoning Inspector and/or Fire Chief is required for the public safety because of an unsafe, insecure or dangerous condition. 
(B)  Work which involves ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure or property, provided such work involves no change in material, design, texture, color or exterior appearance. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.09. - Fast track approval for specific projects. 
(A)  Applicability. The following environmental changes qualify for fast track approval for Certificate of Appropriateness: 
(1)  Awnings if the design remains the same but the color(s) is being modified provided that the color(s) proposed meet the design and color guidelines established by the Board. 
(2)  Signs if the same sign board or a window is used, but the color(s) and information are changed provided that the color(s) proposed meet the design and color guidelines established by the Board. 
(3)  Portable sidewalk signs as long as the sign complies with the regulations outlined in Section 1143.091. 
(4)  Painting of structures and signs as long as the painting does not involve any structural modification and the paint color selection complies with the design and color guidelines established by the Board. 
(5)  Fences, trash enclosures and accessory structures under 250 sq. ft. as long as the design, color and materials are compatible with the primary structure and meet the guidelines stated in Section 1136.11. 
(B)  Procedure. The procedure for Fast Track approval shall be as follows: 
(1)  The Zoning Inspector reviews application for compliance with the Planning and Zoning Code and verifies if the proposed work satisfies the design and color guidelines established by the Board. 
(2)  The Zoning Inspector shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application within eight (8) working days of the complete Certificate of Appropriateness application being filed. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010; Ord. 23-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 24-12. Passed 3-22-2012.) 
Sec. 1136.10. - Procedure for certificate of appropriateness before Design Review Board. 
(A)  The application for a Certificate of Appropriateness: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(B)  The Design Review Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Certificate of Appropriateness application. The Design Review Board may request reports or testimony by City staff or other applicable organizations in reviewing the application. The Certificate of Appropriateness shall be approved if the Design Review Board finds that: 
(1)  Applicable provisions in the Planning and Zoning Code are satisfied. 
(2)  The location and configuration of the building(s) are visually harmonious with their sites and surroundings. 
(3)  The criteria, design guidelines, and color guidelines as established in this chapter are satisfied. 
(C)  If the Certificate of Appropriateness application is disapproved, the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in the record. 
(D)  Certificate of Appropriateness applications must be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved within thirty (30) working days from the date of receipt except that Certificate of Appropriateness applications for demolition must be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved within forty-five (45) working days from the date of receipt. The approval periods may be extended by the mutual agreement of the Design Review Board and the applicant. 
(E)  Applications for review by the Board of Zoning Appeals for conditional uses shall be filed with the City in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 1129 and on forms provided by the City. The application shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 36-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1136.11. - Standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings for certificate of appropriateness. 
When evaluating and considering the appropriateness of any proposed environmental change, including landscaping or exterior change, the Design Review Board shall consider the guidelines outlined in the "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" as adopted by the Secretary of Interior, U.S. Department of Interior. A general overview of these guidelines is as follows: 
(A)  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
(B)  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
(C)  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken. 
(D)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(E)  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved. 
(F)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence. 
(G)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(H)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(I)  New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(J)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.12. - Design guidelines. 
The design guidelines listed below should be used when reviewing Certificate of Appropriateness applications. 
(A)  Building and Site Design. 
(1)  Height in relation to existing structures. 
(2)  Building massing - the relationship of the building width to its height and depth, and its relationship to visual perspective. 
(3)  Window and door treatment which shall include the size, shape and materials of the individual window and door units and the overall harmonious relationship of window and door openings. 
(4)  Exterior detail and relationships, which shall include all projecting and receding elements of the exterior, including but not limited to, porches and overhangs and the horizontal or vertical expressing which is conveyed by these elements. 
(5)  Roof shape, which shall include type, form and materials. 
(6)  Materials, texture and color, which shall include a consideration of material compatibility among various elements of the structure. 
(7)  Compatibility of design and materials, which shall include the appropriateness of the use of exterior design details. 
(8)  Landscape design and plant materials including but not limited to, lighting and the use of landscape details to highlight architectural features or screen or soften undesirable views. 
(9)  Pedestrian environment which shall include the provision of features which enhance pedestrian movement and environment and which relate to the pedestrian's visual perspective. 
(B)  Materials. 
(1)  Masonry and Wood. The use of natural traditional exterior material such as brick, stone, masonry, and wood is encouraged. 
(a)  Sandblasting will not be permitted on masonry. 
(b)  Replaced mortar should duplicate as much as possible the original used in appearance. 
(c)  Replaced brick, stone, masonry, and wood should duplicate the appearance as much as possible to the original used on the structure. 
(2)  Metals. The use of contemporary materials, such as aluminum, other metals, fiberglass and plastics for exterior surfaces on architecturally significant structures shall be prohibited unless the use of such materials would contribute to the preservation or enhancement of existing traditional materials and the overall integrity and longevity of a structure. 
(3)  Roofs. Roofs shall be aesthetically pleasing and the materials proposed shall not alter the historical significance of the structure. 
(4)  Windows and Doors. Windows and doors shall be replaced with similar materials and styles of the original windows and doors. 
(a)  Wood and vinyl-clad wood windows and doors similar to the original are permitted. 
(b)  Storm windows are permitted if painted the same color as the actual window frame and crossbars match with the interior. 
(c)  Rear doors may be replaced with steel doors; however it is recommended that the doors have character with inserts or windows. 
(5)  General Storefront Guidelines. Storefronts may be replaced when there is no historic integrity. Storefronts with historic integrity may be replaced if irreparable. 
(a)  Awnings shall be of traditional nature. Awnings should be the forty-five (45) degrees, made of canvas material, and are of compatible color. They should be attached to mortar joints not brick or stone. 
(b)  Metal awnings may be replaced only if they contribute to the historic integrity of the building or if they are located to the rear of the structure. No new metal awnings will be permitted. 
(c)  Wood may be placed over glass panels on a storefront facade, only if muntins are retained, and the wood is painted a compatible color. 
(d)  Porches and steps that contribute to the historical integrity of the structure should be retained. It is not recommended to enclose porches or steps. 
(6)  Exterior Finishes. Exterior finishes should be compatible with the structure's age and appearance. If brick is painted, it can be repainted. Brick or stone should not be painted. If the owner can show historic proof that the building has been painted or if the building does not have historic integrity, the brick may be painted. 
(C)  Color. Traditional colors and combination of those colors that are both identified with the origin or the era in which the structure of property was originally built, shall be used for exteriors of all new structures to be built, and reconstruction, remodeling and exterior maintenance of existing structures within the District. The Board shall adopt color guidelines that the Board and Zoning Inspector will utilize in reviewing Certificate of Appropriateness applications. 
(D)  Signs. All signs within the District shall conform to the color and material standards of this section, be of such a style or design that reflects the era during which the structure was built, and shall, except for the following exceptions, conform to the requirements of Chapter 1143. 
(1)  Sign size should be minimized so as not to dominate the facade of the structure. 
(2)  Sign color and design shall be compatible with the existing colors and design of the structure. 
(3)  Signs shall not be permitted to cover, "blank out" or close existing window and doorway openings or otherwise hide important architectural features. 
(E)  Guidelines. The design guidelines established in this chapter or any adopted design guidelines, design diagrams, or color guidelines by the Board are to be used in evaluating applications unless the Board determines that due to special circumstances other architectural designs are appropriate. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.13. - Demolition of structures. 
The last alternative for a determined historically significant structure is demolition. In cases where an applicant applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness to demolish a structure within the District, the Board shall conduct a thorough investigation of the application for demolition and shall authorize a Certificate of Appropriateness only when (A) and either (B) or (C) below are satisfied: 
(A)  Historical Significance. The architectural and historic significance of a structure to the character of the District shall be determined by the Board. In addition to the submittal requirements for a Certificate of Appropriateness in Section 1136.10, the applicant is required to include with the application a report or testimony from a historic preservation professional, architect, and/or consultant which verifies the historical significance or non-significance of the proposed structure to be demolished; and, verifies the applicant has considered alternative historical uses of the structure including the preservation of the structure by a governmental or non-profit organization. 
When the Zoning Inspector receives a Certificate of Appropriateness application for demolition of a structure in the District, the application shall be forwarded to the Union County Historical Society. Within twenty (20) days of sending the application to the Historical Society, the Historical Society shall provide information to the Board verifying any architectural or historic significance of the structure. The review may also include recommendations on alternative uses that may preserve the structure. Reasonable extensions may be given if the Historical Society requests them based on the need for additional research. 
The Board shall make its determination after considering the following: 
(1)  No Significance. If the Board finds the structure to have no architectural or historic significance based on its investigation outlined above, the Board may proceed with reviewing the application for demolition. 
(2)  Significance. If the Board finds the structure to have architectural or historic significance based on its investigation outlined above, the Board shall not approve the demolition unless (B) or (C) are satisfied. 
(B)  Economic Use. There exists no reasonable economic use for the structure as it exists or as it might be restored, and that there exists no feasible and prudent alternative to demolition as determined by the Board. The Board may hire an architect, engineer, or professional consultant to provide an independent report to the Board verifying the economic use of the structure as outlined above. The applicant shall be required to pay for the expense of hiring the architect, engineer, or professional consultant and shall permit access to the structure. 
(C)  Deterioration. Deterioration has progressed to the point where it is not economically feasible to restore the structure as determined by the Board. The Board may hire an architect, engineer, or professional consultant to provide an independent report to the Board verifying the economic feasibility to restore the structure as outlined above. The applicant shall be required to pay for the expense of hiring the architect, engineer, or professional consultant and shall permit access to the structure. 
(D)  Preservation of Historic Materials. If the applicant satisfies the criteria above to demolish a structure in the District and the Board decides to approve the demolition, the Board may conditionally approve the demolition with the following conditions: 
(1)  Pictures. The applicant shall permit the Union County Historical Society to take interior and exterior pictures of the structure prior to demolition. 
(2)  Preserving Features of Structure. The applicant shall permit the Union County Historical Society to inspect the structure's interior and exterior to determine any features or items of architectural or historic significance. If the applicant intends to demolish the features or items of architectural or historic significance, the applicant shall permit the Union County Historical Society at the Union County Historical Society's expense to arrange for the removal of the features or items. 
(3)  Landscaping and Grading. If a new structure is not constructed on the property after the demolition, the applicant shall re-grade the property and install sufficient ground cover and landscaping as determined appropriate by the Board. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
Sec. 1136.14. - Appeals. 
Any person whose plan has been disapproved or who has otherwise been aggrieved by a decision of the Design Review Board, Zoning Inspector or designee may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Please refer to Chapter 1129. 
(Ord. 35-10. Passed 12-2-2010.) 
CHAPTER 1137. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Mobile home park regulations, Ch. 1147. 

Sec. 1137.01. - Compliance with regulations. 
The regulations for each district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided or as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(B)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered: 
(1)  To provide for greater height or bulk; 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(3)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(C)  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
(D)  In addition to the provisions of Section 1127.04, any single lot of record existing on March 1, 2004, shall comply with the yard dimension requirements in effect at the time such lot was platted and/or created. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004.) 
Sec. 1137.02. - Official Schedule of District Regulations adopted. 
(A)  District regulations shall be as set forth in the Official Schedule of District Regulations hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this Zoning Ordinance, and in Chapter 1139, "Supplementary District Regulations". Regulations for mobile home parks shall be those specified in Chapter 1147. 
(B)  The Official Schedule specifies which uses are permitted and conditionally permitted in the zoning districts established in Sections 1135.02-1135.15. Permitted Uses include accessory uses and essential services. Conditional Uses require approval of a Conditional Use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in Sections 1129.19-1129.26. 
(C)  Any use not specifically listed in any zoning district in Chapter 1137, shall only be allowed. 
(1)  Upon amendment of this Ordinance and/or Zoning Map as provided in Chapter 1131; or 
(2)  Upon a finding by the Zoning Inspector that the use is substantially similar to a permitted use in the district; or 
(3)  Upon a finding by the Zoning Inspector that the use is substantially similar to a conditionally permitted use in the district, and is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a conditional use. 
Uses permitted or conditionally permitted in any zoning district shall not be allowed to be permitted or conditionally permitted in any other district unless a zoning change is granted through the procedures as outlined in Chapter 1131. 
(D)  The numbers in parenthesis following the specific use in the Official Schedule depicts the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code-1987 revision, and should be used as a definition/ description of the nature of a particular business of industry. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 18-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1137.03. - Identification of the Official Schedule of District Regulations. 
The Official Schedule of District Regulations shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested to and kept secure by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
Secs. 1137.04-1137.08. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1137.09. - Estate Residential Zoning District (ER). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services). 
Child Care Home; 
Single Family Housing; 
Model Homes as Permitted in Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals). 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Home Occupation; 
Public and Quasi Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household). 
40,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 150 feet, with a minimum of 125 ft. at the right-of-way. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings). 
Twenty-five percent (25%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
1,800 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 story or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back: 45 feet; 
One Side: 20 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 40 feet; 
Rear Yard: 60 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 15 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 20 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 45 feet. 
Additional information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Two spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
(Ord. 21-02. Passed 6-13-2002; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1137.10. - Agricultural Residential District (A-R). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Agricultural - Crops (01); 
Agricultural - Services (07); 
Conservation; 
Fish Hatcheries (092); 
Fishing preserves (092); 
Public and Quasi Public Uses; 
Roadside Vegetable Produce Stands; 
Single Family Dwelling; 
Tree Farms, Nurseries (08); 
Very Low Density Single Family Residential; 
Model Homes as Permitted in Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Agricultural/Livestock (02); 
Cemeteries (6553); 
Commercial Recreation; 
Home Occupation; 
Kennels and Boarding Stables including Outside Kennels; 
Mineral Extraction; 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility; 
Veterinary Animal Hospital and/or Animal Clinics. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per household) 40,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 150 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) Twenty-five percent (25%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 1,000 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back 50 feet; 
One Side 20 feet; 
Sum of Sides 40 feet; 
Rear Yard 30 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 20 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 50 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.24 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space. See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. None. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.11. - Suburban Residential District (SR). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services). 
Child Care Home; 
Single Family Housing; 
Model Homes as Permitted In Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals). 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Home Occupation; 
Public and Quasi Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square feet per household). 
20,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 100 feet, with a minimum of 85 ft. at the right-of-way. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings). 
Twenty-five percent (25%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
1,600 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 story or 35 feet, 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set: Back 40 feet; 
One Side: 15 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 30 feet; 
Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet. 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 15 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 40 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Two spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
Ord. 21-02. Passed 6-13-2002; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1137.12. - Low Density Single Family Residential District (R-1). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as. otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Child Care Home; 
Single Family Housing; 
Model Homes as Permitted in Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Home Occupation; 
Family Care Home; 
Public and Quasi Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household) 
11,200 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 80 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
Twenty-five percent (25%) 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
1400 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Story or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back 35 feet; 
One Side 10 feet; 
Sum of Sides 20 feet; 
Rear Yard 40 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line 35 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Two Spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. None. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1137.13. - Medium Density Single Family Residential District (R-2). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Child Care Home; 
Single Family Housing; 
Model Homes as Permitted in Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Commercial Recreation; 
Funeral Homes; 
Home Occupation; 
Low Density Multi-Family Housing 2 unit building limitation**; 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Family Care Home. 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household) 
9,100 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 70 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
Twenty-five percent (25%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
1,200 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back 30 feet; 
One Side 7.5 feet; 
Sum of Sides 17.5 feet; 
Rear Yard 35 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 30 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Two Spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. Dwelling Conversion Permitted as a conditional use. 
** Two Unit Buildings Only. Otherwise R-4 Low Density Multi-Family District Regulations Apply. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 58-16. Passed 12-20-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.14. - High Density Single Family Housing (R-3). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Child Care Home; 
Single Family Housing; 
Model Homes as Permitted in Section 1139.22. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Family Care Homes; 
Funeral Homes; 
Group Home; 
Home Occupation; 
Low Density Multi-Family Housing 2 unit building limitation**; 
Non-Commercial Recreation; 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household) 
7,200 Square Feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 60 feet. 
(F)  Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Twenty-five percent (25%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
1,000 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back: 25 feet; 
One Side: 6 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 15 feet; 
Rear Yard: 30 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet; 
Maximum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Two Spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. Dwelling Conversion Permitted as a conditional use. 
** 2 Unit Buildings Only, Otherwise R-4 Low Density Multi-Family restrictions apply to multi-family conditional uses unless otherwise specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 17-04. Passed 4-8-2004; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1137.15. - Low Density Multi-Family Residential District (R-4). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
2, 3, and 4 Family Multi-Family Units; 
Child Care Home; 
Funeral Homes; 
Family Care Homes; 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses; 
Multi-Family Rental Office/Management Site. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Group Homes; 
Home Occupation; 
Noncommercial Recreation; 
Single Family Residential*. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household) 
5,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
80 feet**. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
Thirty-five percent (35%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
800 square feet***. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back: 25 feet; 
One Side: 6 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 15 feet; 
Rear Yard: 25 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Two spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
None. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
*   R-2 Medium Density Residential District Regulations are applicable unless otherwise stated by the BZA. 
**  A lot split allowing different ownership of each half of a twin single is permitted provided each unit has a minimum 40' frontage. All other requirements remain the same. 
*** 575 square feet for one bedroom apartments. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Sec. 1137.16. - High Density Multi-Family Residential District (R-5). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Child Care Home; 
Funeral Homes; 
Family Care Homes; 
Multi-Family Housing (Low Density and High Density); 
Public and Quasi-Public uses; 
Multi-Family Rental Office/Management Site. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon Issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Group Home; 
Home Occupation; 
Mobile Home Park (Conformance with ORC 3733.02); 
Noncommercial Recreation. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square Feet per Household) 
5,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
100 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
Thirty percent (30%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
800*. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
3 stories or 40 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back: 25 feet; 
One Side: 10 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 25 feet; 
Rear Yard: 30 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet. 
Additional information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Two spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
Provide Refuse and Service Area in Conjunction with Off Street Parking and Loading Areas. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
Dwelling conversion permitted provided all other conditions of this section are met. 
* Nine hundred (900) square feet for mobile housing and five hundred and seventy five (575) square feet for one (1) bedroom apartments. 
Open space for the common use and benefit of the occupants of the dwellings shall be provided for all multi-family projects containing thirteen (13) or more units. Such open space shall be equal to eight percent (8%) of the gross site area and shall be a minimum of 3,500 square feet. Further, such open space shall be organized, arranged and restricted by easements for such use so as to provide a defined area for such open space. In larger projects such open space may be broken into more than one (1) area provided that no one area is smaller than 3,500 square feet. Such open space may include recreational facilities (up to fifty percent (50%) of the area), flood protection and other such amenities necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of such dwellings. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 28-99. Passed 8-26-1999; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006.) 
Secs. 1137.17, 1137.18. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1137.19. - Neighborhood Commercial District (NC). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Apparel and accessory stores (56); 
Hardware stores (5251); 
Grocery stores (541); 
Meat and fish (seafood) markets (542); 
Fruit stores and vegetable markets (543); 
Candy, nut and confectionery stores (544); 
Dairy products stores (545); 
Retail bakeries (546); 
Drug stores and proprietary stores (591); 
Book Stores (5942); 
Video Stores (5735); 
Adult day care center only (8322); 
Child care; 
Eating and drinking places (581); 
Beauty shops (723); 
Barber shops (724); 
Libraries (8231); 
Pressing, alteration and garment repair (727); 
Shoe repair (725); 
Watch repair. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Automotive services (554). Gasoline service stations, provided no portion of a structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated or auxiliary equipment, shall be located in front of the established building line. 
Drive-in facility. Drive-in or outdoor service facility developed in association with a permitted use. 
Public/Quasi Public Uses. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. No minimum lot size is required; however lot size shall be adequate to provide the yard space required by these development standards. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. No minimum width is required; however, all lots shall abut a street and have adequate width to provide the yard space required by these development standards. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) Forty percent (40%) 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
900 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Gross Floor Area. The maximum total gross floor area for any single permitted or conditional use shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. 
(I)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(J)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front setback: 25 feet; 
One Side: 6 feet; 
Sum of Side: 15 feet*; 
Rear yard: 20 feet*. 
*  Side Yards. A side yard shall be required adjacent to a residential zoning district. Such side yard shall be not less than 114 the sum of the height and depth of the building and shall not be less than 15 ft. 
*  Rear Yard. A rear yard shall be required adjacent to a residential zoning district. Such required rear yards shall be not less than 114 the sum of the height and width of the building, and shall not be less than 20 ft. A use to be serviced from the rear shall have a service court, alleyway or combination thereof not less than 40 ft. wide. 
(K)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet; 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear lot Line: 10 feet. 
Additional information in Section 1139.20. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. Non-residential Uses, see Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. See Chapter 1141. 
(N)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143. 
(Ord. 46-03. Passed 11-6-2003; Ord. 46-03. Passed 11-6-2003; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 32-12. Passed 6-28-2012; Ord. 40-13. Passed 11-21-2013.) 
Sec. 1137.20. - Office Residential District (O-R). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Accounting, Auditing and Bookkeeping Services (872); 
Advertising Services (731); 
Arrangement of Transportation- Passenger and Freight (472, 473); 
Barber Shops (724); 
Beauty Shops (723); 
Business Consulting Not Elsewhere Classified (87 48); 
Catalog and Mail Order (Office Only) (5961); 
Child Care Home; 
Child Care Center, Class A and Class B; 
Commercial Banks (60); 
Computer Programming (737); 
Credit Agencies (732); 
Economic, Sociological and Educational Research (8732, 8733); 
Engineering, Architectural and Survey Services (871); 
Health Services Offices (801-804); 
Holding Companies and Other Investment Offices (67); 
Home Health Care Services (808); 
Home Occupation (See Section 1137.20(N)); 
Insurance Agents (64); 
Insurance Carriers (63); 
Legal Services (811); 
Management Services, Consultants, Public Relations (8741-8743); 
Membership Organizations (786); 
Multi-Family Housing- R-4 See Section 1137.20(N); 
News Syndicates (7383); 
Non-Depository Credit Institutions (61); 
Personnel Supply Services (736); 
Photographic Studios (722); 
Public and Quasi Public Uses; 
Real Estate (Office Only) (65); 
(Except Cemeteries 6553); 
Rooming and Boarding Houses (702); 
Bed and Breakfast Inns; 
School Buses (415); 
Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers (62); 
Security Systems Services (7382); 
Single Family Housing R-3 See Section 1137.20(N); 
Social Services (83); 
Watch and Jewelry Repair (763). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Business Services Not Elsewhere Classified (7389); 
Communications (48); 
Funeral Services (726) 
(except crematories not permitted); 
Miscellaneous Health and Allied Services (809); 
Miscellaneous Personal Services (729); 
Museums, Art Galleries, Gardens (84); 
(except animal exhibits); 
Nursing and Personal Care Facilities (805); 
Schools and Educational Services (821-829); 
Services to Dwelling and Other Buildings (734); 
Shoe Repair (725). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
3,600 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
50 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
900 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front setback: 25 feet; 
One Side: 6 feet; 
Sum of sides: 15 feet; 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet*; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet; 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
(*non-residential use 20 feet). 
Additional information in Section 1139.20 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Residential uses, 2 spaces for each dwelling unit; 
Non-residential Uses, see Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
Dwelling Conversion permitted; 
R-4 Section 1137.15 Regulations Apply to Multi-Family Uses; 
R-3 Section 1137.14 Regulations Apply to Single Family Uses; 
Home Occupation permitted only if business use is a permitted use. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 41-13. Passed 11-21-2013.) 
Sec. 1137.21. - Business Residential District (B-R). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted except as otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
All permitted uses in O-R are permitted uses in B-R. In addition, the following are permitted: 
Apparel and Accessory Stores (56); 
Artisan Studio, Artisan Workshop and Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility; 
Auto and Home Supply Stores (553); 
Automatic Merchandising Machine Operators (5962); 
Candy, Nut and Confectionary Stores (544); 
Car Washes (7542); 
Child Day Care Services (835); 
Communications (48); 
Computer Maintenance (7378); 
Computer Rental/Leasing (7377); 
Dairy Product Stores (545); 
Dance Studios (791); 
Eating and Drinking Places (58); 
Educational Services (821-829); 
Electrical Repair (762); 
Funeral Services (726); 
Except crematories; 
Hardware Stores (525); 
Home Furnishing, Furniture And Equipment Stores (57); 
Individual and Family Social Services (832); 
Laundry, Cleaning and Garment Services (721); 
Local Transportation (4119); 
Ambulance Service Only; 
Medical and Dental Laboratories (807); 
Miscellaneous Equipment Rental (Except Heavy Construction) (7353); 
Miscellaneous Food Stores (549); 
Miscellaneous Health and Allied Services (809); 
Miscellaneous Retail (591-594); 
Miscellaneous Personal Services (729); 
Miscellaneous Repair Shops (769); 
Museums, Art Galleries, Gardens (84); 
(except animal exhibits); 
Nursing and Personal Care Facilities (805); 
Other Social Services (839); 
Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores (523); 
Physical Fitness Facilities (7991); 
Residential Care (836); 
Retail Stores Not Classified Elsewhere (599); 
Retail Bakeries (546); 
Retail, Nurseries, Lawn and Garden Supply Stores (526); 
Reupholstery and Furniture Repair (764); 
Services to Dwellings and Other Buildings (734); 
Shoe Repair (725); 
Video Tape Rental (784); 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Amusement and Recreation Services Not Elsewhere Classified (7999); 
Business Services Not Elsewhere Classified (7389); 
Coin Operated Amusement Devices (7993); 
Crematories (7261); 
Detective, Guard and Armored Car Services (Except dogs or other animals) (7381); 
Gasoline Service Stations (554); 
Hotel and Motel (704); 
Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art, Stereo Services (733); 
Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs (7997); 
Multi-Family Residential - R-5 See Section 1137.21(N); 
Photofinishing Laboratories (7384); 
Services Not Elsewhere Classified (899); 
Self Service Storage Facility; 
Taxi Cabs (412); 
Theatrical Producers (792). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
6,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
60 feet. 
(F)  Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
900 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 25 feet; 
One Side Yard: 6 feet; 
Sum of Side Yards: 15 feet; 
Rear Yard: 20 feet; 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 20 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet. 
Additional Information in Section 1139.20. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements. 
See Section 1141.03. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Requirements. 
See Section 1141.03. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions. 
Dwelling Conversion Permitted. 
Home Occupation permitted only if business use is a permitted use. 
Section 1137.16 R-5 regulations apply to high density multi-family as approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 40-02. Passed 8-22-2002; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.22. - Service Business District (B-1). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
All uses permitted or conditional in B-R are permitted in B-1 except single family residential and multi-family residential. 
In addition, the following are permitted: 
Arrangement and Transportation Passenger and Freight (472-473); 
Artisan Studio, Artisan Workshop and Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility; 
Automotive Rental (751); 
Automotive Repair (753); 
Automotive Services (754); 
Boat Dealers (555); 
Bowling Centers (7933); 
Catalog and Mail Order Houses (5961); 
Construction, Special Trades (17); 
Fruit and Vegetable Markets (542); 
General Merchandise Stores (53); 
Grocery Stores (541); 
Hotels and Motels (701 and 704) (excluding Bed and Breakfast Inns); 
Local and Suburban Passenger Transportation (411); 
Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers (521); 
Meat and Fish Markets (542); 
Mini Storage - Public; 
Motion Picture and Video Production (781); 
Motion Picture Theaters (783); 
Multi-family Overhead (See Section 1137.22(N)); 
Public Warehousing and Storage (422); 
Photofinishing Laboratories (7384); 
Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries (27); 
Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties (742). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Bus Charter Service (414); 
Business Services Not Classified Elsewhere (7389); 
Inter City and Rental Bus Transportation (413); 
Recreational Vehicle Dealers (556); 
Rental Heavy Equipment (7353); 
Shopping Center; 
Taxicab Operation (412). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
10,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
60 feet. 
(F)  Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
None. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
3 stories or 40 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 20 feet; 
One Side Yard: 5 feet; 
Sum of Side Yards: 10 feet; 
Rear Yard: 10 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 20 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 6 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 30 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements. 
See Section 1141 and Section 1137.22(N). 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Requirements. 
See Section 1141.03. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions. 
Multi-family housing permitted in overhead business area with minimum square footage as follows: 
1 BR 500; 
2 BR 900; 
3 BR 900; 
4 BR 1100. 
Street parking in front of a lot or parcel does count toward required off street parking for uses in this district. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 20-12. Passed 2-23-2012; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.23. - Government Use District (GOV). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. 
Executive, Legislative, and General Government (91); 
Justice, Public Order, and Safety (92); 
Administration of Human Resource Programs (93); 
Administration of Environmental Quality and Housing Programs (95); 
Administration of Economic Programs (96); 
Public Uses; 
Quasi-public uses; 
Agricultural Production - Crops (011); 
Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and Related Services (87); 
Schools and Educational Services (82); 
Agricultural Services (07) (except 0782 and 0783). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. 
Public Service Facilities. 
(C)  Planned Unit Development Uses. 
See Chapter 1145. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
Two acres. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
250 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings). 
30%. 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
2,500 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 stories or 35 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Set Back: 50 feet; 
One Side: 15 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 35 feet; 
Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 25 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 15 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 15 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 50 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Section 1143.16 Signs in ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and GOV Zoning Districts. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. None. 
(Ord. 64-07. Passed 11-15-2007; Ord. 42-08. Passed 10-23-2008.) 
Sec. 1137.24. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1137.25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6-18,  II, adopted Jan. 22, 2018, reserved  1137.25 which pertained to Central Business District (B-3) and derived from Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 57-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016. 
Sec. 1137.26 - Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimums unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Amusement and Recreation Services Not Elsewhere (7999); 
Apparel and Accessory Stores (56); 
Arrangement of Transportation-Passenger and Freight (472-473); 
Artisan Studio, Artisan Workshop and Special Food/or Beverage Facility; 
Auto and Home Supply Stores (553); 
Automotive Dealers (Not Elsewhere Classified) (559); 
Automotive Rental (751); 
Automotive Repair (753); 
Automotive Services (754); ; 
Boat Dealers (555); 
Bowling Centers (7933); 
Bus Charter Service (414); 
Catalog and Mail Order Houses (With Warehousing Shipping) (5961); 
Child Care Center, Class B; 
Coin Operated Amusement Devices (7993); 
Commercial Banks, S. and l., Credit Unions (60); 
Commercial Printing (275); 
Computer Programming, Data Processing and Other Computer Related Services (737); 
Construction, Special Trades (17); 
Dance Studios (791); 
Direct Selling Establishments (5963); 
Eating and Drinking Places (58); 
Educational Services (821-829); 
Facilities Support Services (8744); 
Food Stores (54); 
Fuel Oil Dealers (retail) (598); 
Gasoline Service Stations (554); 
General Merchandise Stores (53); 
Health Services Offices (801-804); 
Holding and Investment Offices (67); 
Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores (57); 
Hotels and Motels (701 and 704); 
Insurance Carriers (63); 
Inter-City and rural Bus Transportation (413); 
Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers (521); 
Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art, Stereo Services (733); 
Major Office and Commercial Facilities; 
Membership Organizations (86); 
Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs (7997); 
Mini Storage, Public; 
Misc. Equipment Rental (735); 
Miscellaneous Health and Allied Services (809); 
Miscellaneous Repair Shops (769); 
Miscellaneous Retail (591-594); 
Motion Picture and Video Production (781); 
Motion Picture Theaters (783); 
Motor Vehicle Dealers (551 and 552) (new and/or used); 
Motorcycle Dealers (557); 
Museums, Art Galleries, Gardens (84) (except animal exhibits); 
Non-Depository Credit Institutions (61); 
Personal Services (72); 
Physical Fitness Facilities (7991); 
Printing, Newspapers (271); 
Professional Sports Race Tracks (794); 
Public and Quasi Public Uses; 
Real Estate (Except Cemeteries) (65); 
Recreational Vehicle Dealers (556); 
Retail Nurseries, Lawn and Garden Supply Stores (526); 
Retail Stores Not Classified Elsewhere (599); 
Reupholstery and Furniture (764); 
School Buses (415); 
Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers (62); 
Services to Dwellings and Other Buildings (734); 
Sexually Oriented Business Establishments (provided the provisions of Section 1139.24 are met.); 
Shopping Centers; 
Sweepstake Terminal Cafes and/or Skill Game Rooms (provided the provisions of Chapter 722 are met); 
Theatrical Producers (792); 
Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties; 
Excluding Outside Kennels (0742); 
Video Tap Rental (784); 
Warehousing (42); 
Watch and Jewelry Repair (763); 
Wholesale Trade, Durable and Non-Durable Goods (50 and 51). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Amusement Parks (7996); 
Building Construction - General Contractors (15); 
Business Services Not Classified Elsewhere (7389); 
Camp and RV Parks (703); 
Construction - Special Trades (17); 
Detective, Guard and Armored Car Services (7381) except dogs or other animals; 
Hospitals (806); 
Mobile Home Dealers (527); 
Photofinishing Laboratories (7384); 
Research, Development and Biological (8731); 
Taxicabs (412); 
Terminals and Service Facilities for Motor Vehicle Passenger Transportation (417); 
Transportation Services (47) 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. (Square feet per business unit) 
30,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
125 square feet. 
(F)  Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and accessory buildings) 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
None. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
4 stories or 50 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 40 feet; 
One Side: 10 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 20 feet; 
Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 35 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 20 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 50 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
None. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 23-01. Passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 59-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.27. - Hospital Medical District (HMD). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimums unless otherwise specified and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Administration of Human Resource Programs (94); 
Bed and Breakfast; 
Child Care Center, Class A; 
Child Care Centers, Class B; 
Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores (5912); 
Family Care Homes; 
Funeral Services - Crematories (7261); 
Group Homes; 
Health Services (80); 
Professional Schools for Medical Field; 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses; 
Rooming and Boarding Houses (7021); 
Social Services (83). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Multi-Family Residential (See Section 1137.27(N)); 
Single Family Residential (See Section 1137.27(N)). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
9,600 sq. ft. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
80 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Fifty percent (50%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
800 sq. ft. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
50 feet. 
* The maximum building height for principal buildings may be increased to 80 feet if all of the following are met: 
(1)  Property shall be located adjacent to US 33 right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum lot width shall apply to frontage along US 33 right-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum Yard Dimensions per Section 1137.27(I). 
(4)  Buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing on all sides. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 25 feet; 
One Side: 6 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 15 feet; 
Rear: 20 feet. 
* For buildings permitted to be in excess of the maximum height of 50 feet; the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each foot of additional building height over 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 25 feet*; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet; 
* Residential Uses: 15 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Residential uses, two spaces for each dwelling unit; 
Non-residential Uses, see Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
Dwelling Conversion permitted; 
Home Occupation permitted only if business use is a permitted use; 
R-3 and R-4 regulations apply as appropriate unless variances are approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals (Chapter 1129, Sections 1129.12 to 1129.18). 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 60-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 7-13. Passed 2-28-2013.) 
Secs. 1137.28, 1137.29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1137.30. - M-1 Light Manufacturing. 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services). 
Agricultural - crops (01); 
Agricultural - services (07); 
Apparel Manufacturer (23); 
Artisan Studio, Artisan Workshop and Specialty Food/or Beverage Facility; 
Automotive Repair, Services and Parking (75); 
Bakery Products (205); 
Building Construction - General contractors (15); 
Canned, Frozen and Preserved Foods (203); 
Construction - Special Trades (17); 
Dairy Products (202); 
Eating and Drinking Places (58); 
Fish Hatcheries (092); 
Fishing Preserves (092); 
Gas Stations (55); 
Grain Mill Products (204); 
Leather Product Manufacturer (313-319); 
Mfg. of Audio/Visual Equipment (3651); 
Mfg. of Measuring/analyzing Instruments (38) (Except 386, See M-2); 
Publishing Houses (27); 
Research, Development and Testing Services (873); 
Taxicabs Operation (412); 
Transport Terminals (42); 
Transportation Services (47); 
Tree Farms, nurseries (tree) (08); 
Warehousing (42); 
Wholesale - Non-durable (51) (Except 516, 517 - see M-2); 
Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods (50); 
Wholesale Trade (505, 508); 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals). 
Agriculture - Livestock (02); 
Bus Charter Service (414); 
Glass products from glass (323); 
Heavy Construction (16); 
Lumber and Wood Products (24); 
Miscellaneous Mfg. (39); 
Paper and Allied Products (26); 
Terminal and Bus Service (415); 
Textile Mill Products (22); 
Water Plants (491). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
15,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
100 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
N/A. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
50 feet. 
* The maximum building height for principal buildings may be increased to 80 feet if all of the following are met: 
(1)  Property shall be located adjacent to US 33 right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum lot width shall apply to frontage along US 33 right-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum Yard Dimensions per Section 1137.30(I). 
(4)  Buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing on all sides. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 50 feet; 
One Side: 20 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 40 feet; 
Rear: 40 feet. 
* For buildings permitted to be in excess of the maximum height of 50 feet; the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each foot of additional building height over 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 25 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 50 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
See Section 1139.12 and Section 1139.15-1139.23. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 61-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.31. - M-2 Heavy Manufacturing. 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services). 
All permitted uses in M-1 are permitted uses in M-2. In addition, the following are permitted: 
Abrasive and Non-Metallic Mineral (329) (except asbestos products, 3929, see Section 1137.40); 
Agriculture - Livestock (02); 
Airports; 
Apparel Manufacturer (23); 
General Contractors; 
Bus Charter Service (414); 
Computer equipment (35); 
Concrete and Stone Products (327, 328, 329) (except Lime, hydraulic cement); 
Electric Generation Transmission (491); 
Electronic/Electrical Equipment (36); 
Fabricated Metal Products (34) (except 348, see Section 1137.40); 
Food and Kindred Products (20); 
Gas Production and Dist. (492); 
Glass and Glassware (321-323); 
Heavy Construction (16); 
Industrial and Commercial Machinery (35); 
Leather Tanning and Finishing (311); 
Lumber and Wood Products (24); 
Mfg. of Measuring/Analyzing Instruments (38) (except 386, See M-2); 
Miscellaneous Mfg. (39); 
Paper and Allied Products (26); 
Photographic Equipment and Supplies (386); 
Primary Metal Industries (33); 
Railroad Transportation (40); 
Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic Products (30); 
Sanitary Services (495) (except 4953); 
Structural Clay Products (325, 326); 
Terminal and Bus Service (415); 
Textile Mill Products (22); 
Transportation Equipment (37); 
Water Plants (494); 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Chemicals and Allied Products (28); 
Distillation of Turpentine and Resins (0831); 
Gypsum Products (3275); 
Hydraulic Cement (324); 
Lime Mfg. (3274); 
Petroleum Refining (29); 
Smelting and Refining (33); 
Stone Quarries (14); 
Tobacco Products (21). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
40,000 square feet. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
150 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Fifty percent (50%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
N/A. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
50 feet. 
* The maximum building height for principal buildings may be increased to 80 feet if all of the following are met: 
(1)  Property shall be located adjacent to US 33 right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum lot width shall apply to frontage along US 33 right-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum Yard Dimensions per Section 1137.31(I). 
(4)  Buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing on all sides. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 80 feet; 
One Side: 30 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 60 feet; 
Rear: 50 feet. 
* For buildings permitted to be in excess of the maximum height of 50 feet; the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each foot of additional building height over 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 25 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 20 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 80 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
See Section 1139.12 and Section 1139.15 to 1139.23. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 62-12. Passed 1-10-2013.) 
Sec. 1137.32. - Special District One (SD1). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Accounting, Auditing and Bookkeeping Services (872); 
Agricultural - Crops (01); 
Agricultural - Services (except 0752) (07); 
Amusement and Recreation Services Not Elsewhere Classified (7999); 
Apparel and Accessory Stores (56); 
Apparel Manufacturer (23); 
Arrangement of Transportation - Passenger and Freight (472); 
Arrangement of Transportation of Freight and Cargo (Office Only) (473); 
Artisan Studio, Artisan Workshop, and Specialty Food/or Beverage Facility; 
Auto and Home Supply Stores (553); 
Automatic Merchandising Machine Operators (5962); 
Automotive Dealers Not Elsewhere Classified (559); 
Automotive Rental, Repair and Services (75); 
Boat Dealers (555); 
Bowling Centers (7933); 
Building Construction - General Contractors (15); 
Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply and Mobile Home Dealers (52); 
Bus Charter Service (414); 
Business Consulting Not Elsewhere Classified (8748); 
Business Services (73); 
Catalog and Mail Order (5961); 
Coin Operated Amusement Devices (7993); 
Commercial Printing (275); 
Communications (48); 
Computer Equipment (357); 
Construction - Special Trade (17); 
Dairy Products (202); 
Dance Studios (791); 
Director Selling Establishments (5963); 
Eating and Drinking Places (58); 
Economic, Sociological and Educational Research (8732 and 8733); 
Educational Services (82); 
Electrical Repair (762); 
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services (49); 
Engineering, Architectural and Survey Services (871); 
Facilities Support Services (8744); 
Food Stores (54); 
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate (except cemeteries) Division H (60-67); 
Fish Hatcheries (0921); 
Fishing Preserves (0921); 
Food and Kindred Products (20); 
Fuel Oil Dealers (retail) (598); 
Gasoline Service Stations (554); 
General Merchandise Stores (53); 
Health Services Offices (801-804); 
Home Furnishing, Furniture and Equipment Stores (57); 
Hotels and Motels (701 and 704); 
Individual and Family Social Services (832); 
Inter City and Rental Bus Transportation (413); 
Job Training and Vocational Services (833); 
Leather Product Manufacturer (313-319); 
Legal Services (81); 
Local and Suburban Passenger Transportation; 
Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers (521); 
Major Offices and Commercial Facilities; 
Management Services, Consultants, Public Relations (8741-8743); 
Medical and Dental Laboratories (807); 
Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs (7997); 
Mfg. of Audio/Visual Equipment (3651); 
Mfg. of Measuring/ Analyzing Instruments (except 386) (38); 
Mini-Storage, Public; 
Miscellaneous Health and Allied Services (809); 
Miscellaneous Retail (591-594); 
Miscellaneous Repair Services (76); 
Motion Picture Distribution (7822); 
Motion Picture Theaters (783); 
Motion Picture and Video Production (781); 
Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing (42); 
Motor Vehicles Dealers (new and used) (551 and 552); 
Motorcycle Dealers (557); 
Museums, Art Galleries, Gardens (except animal exhibits) (84); 
Personal Services (72); 
Photographic Equipment and Supplies (386); 
Physical Fitness Facilities (7991); 
Printing, Newspapers (271); 
Professional Sports Race Tracks (794); 
Public Uses; 
Publishing Houses (27); 
Quasi-Public Uses; 
Recreational Vehicle Dealers (556); 
Retail Stores Not Classified Elsewhere (599); 
Reupholstery and Furniture (764); 
School Buses/Terminal and Bus Services (415); 
Services Not Elsewhere Classified (899); 
Shopping Center; 
Sweepstakes Terminal Cafes and/or Skill Game Rooms (provided the provisions of Chapter 722 are met.); 
Taxicabs Operation (412); 
Theatrical Producers (792); 
Transportation Services (47); 
Tree Farms, Nurseries (08); 
Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties; 
Excluding Outside Kennels (0742); 
Video Tape Rental (784); 
Watch and Jewelry Repair (763); 
Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods (50); 
Wholesale Trade - Non-durable Goods (51). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Agriculture/Livestock (02); 
Airports (4581); 
Amusement Parks (7996); 
Bakery Products (205); 
Camp and RV Parks (703); 
Electronic/Electrical Equipment (36); 
Glass Products from Glass (323); 
Heavy Construction (16); 
Hospitals (806); 
Lumber and Wood Products (24); 
Miscellaneous Mfg. (39); 
Non-Durable Goods (except 516, 517) (51); 
Paper and Allied Products (26); 
Research, Development and Testing Services (873); 
Research, Development and Biological (8731); 
Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic Products (30); 
Terminals and Service Facilities for Motor Vehicle Passenger Transportation (417); 
Textile Mill Products (22); 
Water Plants (4941). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
30,000. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
125 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
Forty percent (40%). 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
N/A. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
50 feet. 
* The maximum building height for principal buildings may be increased to 80 feet if all of the following are met: 
(1)  Property shall be located adjacent to US 33 right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum lot width shall apply to frontage along US 33 right-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum Yard Dimensions per Section 1137.32(I). 
(4)  Buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing on all sides. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
Front Setback: 40 feet; 
One Side: 10 feet; 
Sum of Sides: 20 feet; 
Rear: 20 feet. 
* For buildings permitted to be in excess of the maximum height of 50 feet; the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each foot of additional building height over 50 feet. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 35 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 10 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 20 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 50 feet. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(M)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143. 
(N)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
See Sections 1139.12 and Section 1139.15 to 1139.23. 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997; Ord. 2-06. Passed 2-9-2006; Ord. 58-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 63-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 10-15. Passed 2-2-2015; Ord. 28-16. Passed 7-25-2016.) 
Sec. 1137.33 - Uptown Single Family Residential District (U-SF). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Child Care Home; 
Home Occupation; 
Single Family Housing (Except modular housing units). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Group Home; 
Low Density Multi-Family Housing 2 unit buildings only; 
Family Care Home; 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses. 
(C)  Minimum Lot Size. 
No minimum lot size is required, however all lots shall abut a public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Width. 
No minimum lot width is required, however all lots shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to meet the required yard and front build-to setbacks and to meet minimum access requirements. 
(E)  Maximum Lot Width. 
The maximum lot width shall be no wider that the average lot width of the adjacent parcels on the same block of the subject property or ten (10) percent wider than an immediately adjacent parcel on the same side of the street. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
No maximum percentage is required, however the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks as well as the front build-to setback. 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
900 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Floor Area. 
The maximum floor area shall be no larger than the average floor area of the adjacent structures on the same block of the subject property or ten (10) percent larger than the immediately adjacent structure on the adjacent parcel on the same side of the street. 
(I)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Stories, 35 feet, or (10) percent higher than the immediately adjacent structure on the same side of the street. 
(J)  Build-To Line. 
The build-to line shall be calculated as the distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street Buildings used in the build-to line calculation shall meet the following: 
1.  Fronted on the same street as the subject property. 
2.  Located between the nearest cross streets, not including alleys. 
3.  Located on a property within a U-SF, U-MF, U-C or U-T zoning. 
At least fifty (50) percent of the building's front elevation shall be located within three (3) feet of the build-to line, and no part of the front elevation shall be located more than three (3) feet in front of the build-to line. 
(K)  Minimum Yard Setbacks. 
Side yard: 5 feet; 
Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
(L)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet; 
Minimum Yard Setbacks: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 30 feet. 
(M)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Two Spaces for each Dwelling Unit. 
(n)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. None. 
(o)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143 and Design Guidelines for Historic Uptown Marysville. 
(Ord. 10-18 . Passed 1-22-2018) 
Sec. 1137.34. - Uptown Multi-Family (U-MF). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Multi-Family Housing; 
Multi-Family Rental Office/Management Site. 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses. 
(C)  Minimum Lot Size. 
No minimum lot size is required, however all lots shall abut a public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Width. 
No minimum lot width is required, however all lots shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to meet the required yard and front build-to setbacks and to meet minimum access requirements. 
(E)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
No maximum percentage is required, however the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks as well as the front build-to line setback. 
(F)  Minimum Floor Area. 
500 square feet (Finished Floor) for One Bedroom. Each additional Bedroom shall add at least 200 square feet to the minimum floor area. 
(G)  Minimum Height of Principal Buildings. 
2 Stories. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
3 Stories, 36 feet, or (10) percent higher than the immediately adjacent structure on the same side of the street. 
(I)  Build-To Line. 
The build-to line shall be calculated as the distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street. Buildings used in the build-to line calculation shall meet the following: 
1.  Fronted on the same street as the subject property. 
2.  Located between the nearest cross streets, not including alleys. 
3.  Located on a property within a U-SF, U-MF, U-C or U-T zoning. 
At least fifty (50) percent of the building's front elevation shall be located within three (3) feet of the build-to line, and no part of the front elevation shall be located more than three (3) feet in front of the build-to line. 
(J)  Minimum Yard Setbacks. 
Side yard: 5 feet; 
Rear Yard: 5 feet, 
(K)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet; 
Minimum Yard Setbacks: 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Front Lot Line: 30 feet. 
(L)  Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements. 
2 Spaces per each Dwelling Unit. 
(M)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
None. 
(N)  Signs Permitted. See Chapter 1143 and Design Guidelines for Historic Uptown Marysville. 
(O)  Supplemental Standards. 
Two (2) or more multi-unit structures located on the same lot shall locate no closer than five (5) feet from each structure. 
(Ord. 7-18 . Passed 1-22-2018) 
Sec. 1137.35. - Uptown Transitional (U-T). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimum regulations unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Accounting, Auditing and Bookkeeping Services (872); 
Advertising Services (731); 
Artisan Studio; 
Business Consulting Not Elsewhere Classified (8748); 
Child Care Home; 
Economic, Sociological and Educational Research (8732, 8733); 
Engineering, Architectural and Survey Services (871); 
Home Occupation (See Section 1137.20(n)); 
Insurance Agents (64); 
Legal Services (811); 
Photographic Studios (722); 
Public and Quasi Public Uses; 
Real Estate (Office Only) (65) (Except Cemeteries 6553); 
Rooming and Boarding Houses (702); 
Bed and Breakfast Inns; 
Single Family Housing (Except modular housing units); 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals); 
Artisan Workshop; 
Barber Shops (724); 
Beauty Shops (723); 
Funeral Services (726) (except crematories not permitted); 
Low Density Multi-Family Housing 2 unit buildings only Museums, Art Galleries, Gardens (84) (except animal exhibits); 
Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility; 
Tax Return Preparation Services (7291); 
(C)  Minimum Lot Size. 
No minimum lot size is required, however all lots shall abut a public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Width. 
No minimum lot width is required, however all lots shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to meet the required yard and front build-to setbacks and to meet minimum access requirements. 
(E)  Maximum Lot Width. 
The maximum lot width shall be no wider that the average lot width of the adjacent parcels on the same block of the subject property or ten (10) percent wider than the immediately adjacent parcel on the same side of the street. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. (Principal and Accessory Buildings) 
No maximum percentage is required, however the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks as well as the front build-to setback. 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
900 square feet. 
(H)  Maximum Floor Area. 
The maximum floor area shall be no larger than the average floor area of the adjacent structures on the same block of the subject property or ten (10) percent larger than the immediately adjacent structure on the adjacent parcel on the same side of the street. 
(I)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
21/2 Stories, 35 feet, or (10) percent higher than the immediately adjacent structure on the same side of the street. 
(J)  Build-to Line. 
The build-to line shall be calculated as the distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street. Buildings used in the build-to line calculation shall meet the following: 
(1)  Fronted on the same street as the subject property. 
(2)  Located between the nearest cross streets, not including alleys. 
(3)  Located on a property within a U-SF, U-MF, U-C or U-T zoning. 
At least fifty (50) percent of the building's front elevation shall be located within three (3) feet of the build-to line, and no part of the front elevation shall be located more than three (3) feet in front of the build-to line. 
(K)  Side yard setback. 
Zero (0) feet if the property does not directly abut a residentially zoned district. If the property abuts a residential district, the side yard setback from the side abutting the residential zoning district shall be eight (8) feet as measured from the side property line. Eave, cornices, canopies, windowsills, balconies, bay windows, chimneys, or other architectural features shall not extend past any property line. 
(L)  Rear yard setback. 
Twenty (20) feet as measured from the rear property line. 
(M)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height: 15 feet*; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Front Lot Line: 25 feet; 
Side Lot Line: 5 feet; 
Rear Lot Line: 5 feet. 
* Non-residential use 20 feet. 
Additional information in Section 1139.20 
(N)  Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements. 
Residential uses, 2 spaces for each dwelling unit; 
Non-residential Uses, see Chapter 1141. 
(O)  Minimum Off Street Loading Space Requirements. 
See Chapter 1141. 
(P)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143 and Design Guidelines for Historic Uptown Marysville. 
(Q)  Other Provisions and Requirements. 
Dwelling Conversion permitted. 
R-2 Section 1137.13 Regulations Apply to Single Family Uses; 
Home Occupation permitted only if business use is a permitted use. 
(Ord. 8-18 . Passed 1-22-2018) 
Sec. 1137.36. - Uptown Commercial (U-C). 
The regulations for this district shall be minimums unless otherwise noted and shall be uniformly applied except as otherwise granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(A)  Permitted Uses. (Including accessory uses and essential public services) 
Accounting, Auditing and Bookkeeping Services (872); 
Apparel and Accessory Stores (56); 
Arrangement of Passenger Transportation (472); 
Artisan Studio; 
Artisan Workshop; 
Business Consulting Not Classified Elsewhere (8748); 
Business Services (73) (Except Equipment Rental - 735 and Business Services); 
Not Classified Elsewhere - (7389); 
Communications (48); 
Dance Studios (791); 
Eating and Drinking Places (58); 
Economic, Sociological and Educational Research (8732 and 8733); 
Educational Services (82); 
Electrical Repair (762); 
Engineering, Architectural and Survey Services (871); 
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate (except cemeteries); 
Division H (Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate)(60-67); 
Food Stores (54); 
General Merchandise Stores (53); 
Hardware Stores (525); 
Health Services Offices (801-804); 
Health Services (Except hospitals - 806) (80); 
Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores (57); 
Individual and Family Social Services (832); 
Legal Services (81); 
Management Services, Consultants, Public Relations (8741 and 8743); 
Membership Organizations (86); 
Miscellaneous Retail (591-594 and 599); 
Motion Picture Distribution (7822); 
Motion Picture Theaters (783); 
Multi-family (See Section 1137.36(M)); 
Museums and Art Galleries (841); 
Other Social Services (839); 
Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores (523); 
Personal Services (72) (Except Funeral Service and Crematories); 
Pressing, Alteration and garment repair (727); 
Public and Quasi Public Uses; 
Rooming and Boarding Houses (702); 
Specialty Food and/or Beverage Facility; 
Video Tape Rental (784); 
Watch and Jewelry Repair (763). 
(B)  Conditional Uses. (Permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals) 
Automobile Parking (752); 
Bowling Centers (7933); 
Commercial Printing (275); 
Hotels and Motels (704); 
Motion Picture and Video Production (781); 
Newspapers, Publishing and/or Printing (271); 
Physical Fitness Facilities (7991); 
Reupholstery and Furniture Repair (764); 
Retail Nurseries, Lawn and Garden Supply Stores (526); 
Theatrical Producers (792). 
(C)  Planned Unit Development. 
See Chapter 1145 for Planned Unit Development uses and requirements. 
(D)  Minimum Lot Size. 
None. 
(E)  Minimum Lot Width. 
None. 
(F)  Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied. 
(Principal and Accessory Buildings) No maximum percentage is required, however the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard setbacks. 
(G)  Minimum Floor Area. 
None except see Section 1137.36(M) for multi-family minimums. 
(H)  Maximum Height of Principal Buildings. 
4 stories or 50 feet. 
(I)  Minimum Yard Dimensions. 
None. 
(J)  Accessory Buildings. 
Maximum Height 25 feet; 
Minimum Distance to: 
Side Lot Line: 0 feet *; 
Rear Lot Line: 0 feet *; 
* 10 feet if adjacent to R district. 
(K)  Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements. 
Properties within the Uptown Commercial District shall be exempt from providing off street parking spaces as required by Chapter 1141. In the event parking spaces are provided on a property, the parking area shall meet all requirements of chapter 1141 with the exception of Section 1141.12. 
(L)  Signs Permitted. 
See Chapter 1143 and Design Guidelines for Historic Uptown Marysville. 
(M)  Other Provisions. 
Multi-Family housing permitted when located above 1 st floor retail/commercial business with minimum square footage as follows: 
1 BR 500; 
2 BR 700; 
3 BR 900; 
4 BR 1100. 
(Ord. 9-18 . Passed 1-22-2018) 
Secs. 1137.37-1137.39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1137.40. - Prohibited uses. 
Because Council finds the following uses to be: 
(A)  Not harmonious with nor in accordance with general objectives or with any specific objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan and/or the zoning ordinance; 
(B)  Will be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses; 
(C)  Will involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare; 
(D)  Will be a nuisance; and/or 
(E)  Not in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City; 
These uses are prohibited in any districts: 
Asbestos Products (3292); 
Acid Waste, Dumps, Incinerators, Landfills, Sludge Disposal Sites (4953); 
Coal and Metal Mining (10, 12); 
Explosive Manufacture and Storage (2892); 
Hunting Preserves (097); 
Oil and Gas Extraction (except self-help gas) (13); 
Ordnance and Accessories (348). 
(Ord. 29-97. Passed 6-12-1997.) 
CHAPTER 1139. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Swimming pool defined,  1123.01(B)(92) 
State Law reference- Swimming pool, health requirements, Ohio Adm. Ch. 3701-31. 

Sec. 1139.01. - General. 
The purpose of supplementary district regulations is to set specific conditions for various uses, classification of uses or areas where problems are frequently encountered. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.02. - Conversion of dwellings to more units. 
A residence may be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units provided: 
(A)  The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the zoning regulations for new structures in that district; 
(B)  The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new structures in that district; 
(C)  The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that which is required for new construction in that district; 
(D)  The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.03. - Private swimming pools. 
No private swimming pool shall be allowed in any commercial or residential district, except as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions and requirements: 
(A)  The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located; 
(B)  It may not be located closer than ten feet to any property line; 
(C)  The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall be walled or fenced to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height, maintained in good condition with a gate and lock, and meet the barrier requirements as established in the swimming pools, spas and hot tub appendix of the Ohio Residential Code. 
(D)  Swimming pools must be located at the rear of a residence and if a comer lot, shall not be closer to the street line than the residence. 
(Ord. 44-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1139.04. - Community or club swimming pools. 
Community and club swimming pools are permitted in any commercial or residential district, but shall comply with the following conditions and requirements: 
(A)  The pool is intended solely for the enjoyment of the members and families and guests of members of the association or club under whose ownership or jurisdiction the pool is operated; 
(B)  The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by the bathers, shall not be closer than fifty feet to any property line; 
(C)  The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be walled or fenced to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the thoroughfare or adjacent properties. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height, maintained in good condition, and meet the barrier requirements as established in the Ohio Building Code. 
(Ord. 40-08. Passed 10-23-2008.) 
Sec. 1139.05. - Temporary buildings. 
(A)  Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment and material used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress, but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the completion date of the project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the Zoning Inspector. 
(B)  Portable Storage Containers that are loaded with materials and placed on a residential property for the purpose of temporarily storing materials are permitted with the following regulations: 
(1)  Portable Storage Containers shall not be located on any parcel for a period exceeding fourteen days from date of delivery. At the end of fourteen days, an extension for a maximum fourteen additional days may be granted by the Zoning Inspector based on just cause. 
(2)  Portable Storage Containers shall not be located on any parcel for a period exceed twenty-eight days per calendar year. 
(3)  Portable Storage Containers shall be kept in the driveway of the property at the furthest accessible point from the street. The location of the Portable Storage Container on a driveway shall not obstruct visibility nor block the sidewalk. If no driveway is present, approval from City departments for the placement of the Portable Storage Container prior to its delivery is required. 
(4)  Only one Portable Storage Container shall be placed at any residential property at one time. 
(5)  Penalties shall be applied to the container owner, lessor and lessee per Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 49-07. Passed 10-11-2007.) 
Sec. 1139.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 50-02, repealed  1139.06, which pertained to parking and storage of certain vehicles. See Chapter 1319 for current regulation. 
Sec. 1139.07. - Required trash areas. 
(A)  All commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential uses that provide trash and/or garbage collection areas shall be enclosed on at least three sides by a solid wall or fence a minimum of four feet in height or one foot higher than the receptacles therein if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure. 
(B)  Provisions for adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as determined by the Zoning Inspector shall be required. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.08. - Supplemental yard and height regulations. 
In addition to all yard regulations specified in Chapter 1137 and in other sections of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of Sections 1139.09 through 1139.14 shall be used for interpretation and clarification. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.09. - Setback requirements for corner buildings. 
On a corner lot the principal building and its accessory structure shall be required to have the same setback distance from all street right-of-way lines as required for the front yard in the district in which such structures are located. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.10. - Visibility at intersections. 
On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along such street lines fifty feet from the point of intersection. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.11. - Yard requirements for multi-family dwellings. 
Multi-family dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front, one rear and two side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district. Each individual building shall meet all yard requirements for the appropriate district as though it were on an individual lot. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.12. - Side and rear yards for non-residential uses abutting residential districts. 
Non-residential buildings or uses shall not be located nor conducted closer than ten feet to any lot line of a residential district. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.13. - Architectural projections. 
Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yard with the exception of canopies/awnings in the B-3 zoning district which are governed by Section 1137.25(N). 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.14. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
The height limitations contained in various Sections of Chapter 1137 do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard to the safe landing and take-off of aircraft at the airport. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.15. - Special provisions for non-residential districts or uses. 
(A)  Compliance Required. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other substance, condition or element in such a manner or in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises (referred to herein as "dangerous or objectionable elements"); provided that any use permitted or not expressly prohibited by this Zoning Ordinance may be undertaken and maintained if it conforms to the regulations of this chapter limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the point of the determination of their existence. 
(B)  Existing Uses. Any use authorized under the provisions of Section 1139.15 shall comply continually therewith and shall remedy any dangerous or objectionable elements which may develop in the course of its operation. 
(1)  Whenever it is alleged that a use of land or structure creates or is likely to create or otherwise produce dangerous or objectionable elements as defined in Section 1139.17, the City Engineer shall be responsible for conducting an investigation of the allegation. The City Engineer may employ a competent specialist, outside laboratory, or obtain use of whatever equipment is needed for the purpose of determining the nature and extent of such dangerous or objectionable elements and a practical means of remedying such condition. 
(2)  Upon completion of the investigation and receipt of recommendation of such outside specialists or laboratory as used, and if a violation is found, the City Engineer may determine the measures, to the extent practical, that should be taken to correct the violation. To the extent a violation is found, the City Engineer shall so advise the Zoning Inspector who shall proceed with the enforcement of such measures in accordance with the provision of Section 1125.01. Appeals from decisions of the City Engineer, if made, shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 1129.09. 
(3)  The City shall bear the costs of the various tests, consultant fees or other investigations which are required herein. in the event that operation or use of such property is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter by the City Engineer, the Board of Zoning Appeals, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, the owner of the use under investigation shall reimburse the City for all such expenses. Such reimbursement shall be made within thirty days from the date of the final Board ruling or court judgement. 
(C)  New Uses. The applicant for new uses shall bear the actual costs of all tests and investigations required to establish compliance or ability to comply and shall be in addition to the usual zoning and other City permit fees. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.16. - Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of performance standards. 
The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent (herein referred to as "at any point"); provided, however, that the measurements necessary for enforcement of performance standards set forth in this chapter shall be taken at different points in different districts in relation to the establishment or use creating the element being measured (herein referred to as "point of measurement") as follows: 
(A)  M-1 and M-2 Districts. At the boundary or boundaries of the District, or at any point within an adjacent District. 
(B)  All Other Districts. Twenty-five feet from the establishment or use, or at the lot line of the use if closer to the establishment or use. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.17. - Performance standard regulations. 
The relevant provisions of Federal, state and local law and regulations apply to this section. In addition, the following provisions, standards and specifications shall also apply in Manufacturing Districts (M-1 and M-2): 
(A)  Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate safety devices plans and procedures against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials in open fire shall be prohibited at any point. 
(B)  Radioactivity or Electric Disturbance. Anyone using equipment, materials or in any way handling radioactive materials shall be licensed by the NRC as required by the NRc. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point. Electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance are also prohibited. 
(C)  Noise. At the point of measurement specified in Section 1139.16 the sound pressure level of noise radiated from a facility at night time shall not exceed fifty decibels *1 or the average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the noise generator, whichever is the higher, in any octave band of frequency above 300 cycles per second. The sound pressure level shall be Meter *2, and an Octave Band Analyzer *3 that conform to the specifications such as those published by the American Standards Association and as approved by the City Engineer. Noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled, as not to become objectionable, due to intermittence, beat frequency, impulsive character (hammering, etc.) periodic character (humming, screeching, etc.), or shrillness. 
*1 Sound Pressure Level-Decibels re 0.0002 dynes/cm2. 
*2 American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York. 
*3 American Standard Specifications for an Octave-Band Fulter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10 - 1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New York. 
For facilities which radiate noise only during a normal working shift. The allowable decibel sound level given above shall be increased twenty-five decibels, or ten decibels above the average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the noise generator, whichever is the higher. (Infrequent but necessary loud noise i.e., five minutes each four hours per, may not exceed 80). Sirens, whistles, bells, etc., which are maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose (such as fire and air raiding warning sirens) are excluded from the above regulations, including private warning systems that are part of a warning system approved for such use by the City. 
(D)  Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement specified in Section 1139.16. 
(E)  Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point, from any chimney or otherwise, or visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power's Micro-Ringlemann Chart, published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyrighted 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction of the standard Ringlemann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines), except that visible grey smoke of a shade equal to No. 2 on such Chart may be emitted for four minutes in any thirty minutes. These provisions applicable to visible grey smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with an apparently equivalent capacity. 
(F)  Odor. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the point of measurement specified in Section 1139.16. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such qualities of offensive odors Table III, "Odor Thresholds," in Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemist Assn., Inc., Washington, D.C. 
(G)  Dust, Fly Ash, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air Pollution. No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, to animals, vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling, at any point; and in no event any emission, from any chimney or otherwise, of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grains per cu. ft. of the conveying gas at any point. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and fifty percent (50%) excess air. 
(H)  Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from flood lights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement specified in Section 1141.03. This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(I)  Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, stream, or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the Department of Health of the State of Ohio and by the Superintendent of the Waste Water Treatment Plant (see Chapter 921-Codified Ordinances of Marysville, Ohio) and by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or standards equivalent to those approved by such department for similar uses, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or Otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements. 
(J)  Hazardous or Toxic Materials. All activities involving, and all storage of hazardous or toxic materials shall be provided with at any point, adequate safety devices, plans and procedures to protect against injury to persons on the premises using or storing such materials or to persons in other districts or on neighboring property. 
(K)  Erosion. No erosion, by wind, water or other means, shall be permitted which will carry objectionable substances or inflict damage onto neighboring property. 
(L)  Manufacturing Uses Abutting Residential Districts. Uses permitted, conditional or non-conforming in a manufacturing district, shall not be located or conducted closer than 100 feet to any lot line of a residential district except that the minimum yard requirements contained in Section 1137.30(I) and (J) and Section 1137.31(I) and (J) may be utilized if acceptable landscaping, fencing or other screening approved by the Zoning Inspector is provided. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.18. - Enforcement provisions. 
(A)  Proof of Compliance. The Zoning Inspector or Board of Zoning Appeals, prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and tolerances. 
(B)  The Zoning Inspector or Board of Zoning Appeals may also establish a reporting requirement of at least annually, requiring the applicant to show results of eliminating or reducing dangerous or objectionable elements to acceptable limits and tolerances. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.19. - Measurement procedures. 
Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y.; the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington D.C.; and the United States Bureau of Mines, Nuclear Regulatory Agency, Federal or Ohio E.P.A., OSHA, or other agencies as appropriate to an industry. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.20. - Accessory buildings in residential districts. 
Two accessory buildings may be erected in residential districts ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and B-R Districts provided one of the accessory buildings is a private garage, not exceeding 750 square feet in floor area and fifteen feet in height otherwise, only one accessory building may be erected. An accessory building other than a private garage may not exceed 250 square feet in floor area and fifteen feet in height. In no instance shall the total floor area of the building or buildings exceed 750 square feet. An accessory structure shall have an exterior which meets these standards and is compatible in appearance to the principal residential structure on the parcel or lot. Compatibility shall be determined based upon the following criteria: exterior building materials, color, architecture, roof style, and siding. 
(Ord. 46-03. Passed 11-6-2003.) 
Sec. 1139.21. - Fences. 
(A)  Fences or walls shall not be installed prior to obtaining a zoning permit. Applications for such a permit shall include plans or drawings to be at minimum 81/2" x 11" in size and not to exceed 11" x 17" in size, showing the actual and accurate shape and dimensions of the property on which the fence or wall is to be erected; the exact height, location, length, type of material, type of construction of such proposed fence or wall; the location of all structures on the lot; location and width of easements or no build zones; or any other information deemed necessary by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. 
(B)  Approved fence and wall materials include stone, brick, wood, chain-link, and iron. Synthetic products or other material as approved by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative may also be used. The smooth finished side of the fence or wall shall be the side of the fence that faces outward from the yard being fenced; All of the framing or support members shall face inward of the yard being fenced. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair, be structurally sound, and be attractively finished at all times by the owners and/or occupant of the lot on which they are located as well as the space between such fence and the lot line of any adjoining property. Hedges or other landscape material must be kept trimmed to or below the maximum allowed height and trimmed back to the inner edge of the public sidewalk area or property line. 
(C)  The following are specifics to the type of fencing installed. 
(1)  Fences may be erected as follows: 
(a)  Prohibited materials. No barbed wire, razor barb or electrically charged fence shall be erected, except in the M-1 or M-2 districts, in the AR zoning district when used to contain livestock or for uses under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) (1987 version) 92. 
(b)  Height. No fence shall be erected to a height exceeding six feet, except in M-1 and M-2 Districts, where the maximum height shall be twelve feet. Barbed wire or razor barb shall not be included in such computations. 
(c)  Location. Fences may be placed on the side or rear property line, but may not be placed closer to the street than the front of the main building, except in A-R Districts, where they may not be placed closer to the street or road than the street or road right-of-way line only when used to contain livestock. 
(2)  Decorative fence may be erected as follows: 
(a)  Prohibited material. Decorative fences may be constructed of any material except barbed wire, razor barb, woven or chain-link. 
(b)  Height. Decorative fences may be erected to a maximum height of six feet. However, when placed closer to the street than the front of the main building on any lot, the maximum height of such fence shall be three feet, and shall not be sight obscuring. For corner lots, when decorative fences are constructed in a triangle formed by measuring thirty feet along each street right-of-way line, the maximum height shall be two feet, six inches above the grade. 
(c)  Location. Decorative fences may be placed on the side or rear property line and may not be placed closer to the street or road than the street or road right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 16-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1139.22. - Residential model home and multi-family rental office/management site. 
Residential model homes and multi-family rental offices/management sites, where permitted (see appropriate sections of Chapter 1137) shall be operated under the following conditions: 
(A)  Residential Model Homes. 
(1)  Residential Model Homes are intended for open house purposes exclusively for prospective home buyers and not for corporate meetings. 
(2)  Model Homes are to be sited so that they are easily accessible and identifiable. 
(3)  Signage shall conform to Codified Ordinance Chapter 1143. 
(4)  There is a two-year time limit for residential model homes. An extension may be granted if the development is not completed within two years provided circumstances beyond the developer's control make the extension necessary. Such circumstances may include a down turn in the economy, the size of the development is such that a two year build-out was impractical, etc. Extensions shall be in one year increments, not to exceed three extensions. 
(5)  Any non-customary residential lighting shall be shut off by 9:00 p.m. daily. 
The City of Marysville is not responsible for restricted deed covenants if applicable for individual subdivisions. 
(B)  Multi-Family Rental Office/Management Site. 
(1)  Multi-family rental offices management sites are intended for open house purposes exclusively for prospective tenants and not for corporate meetings. 
(2)  Multi-family rental offices/management sites are to be located so that they are easily accessible and identifiable. 
(3)  Signage shall conform to Codified Ordinance Chapter 1143. 
(4)  Any non-customary residential lighting shall be shut off by 9:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. 35-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1139.23. - Special provisions for certain public uses and public service facilities. 
In order to assure services to all areas within the City limits, certain public uses and public service facilities shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Those services, with conditions and requirements, are as follows: 
(A)  Water storage towers provided that there is a minimum of seventy-five feet from the property line to the base of the tower and that the City Engineer documents and approves the location is necessary and appropriate for the needs of the water distribution system. 
(B)  Sewage pumping stations where those pumping stations are necessary to serve the area in which they are located and the City Engineer documents and approves the need for the pumping station at that location. Any such sewage pumping station shall be fenced and in residential districts, shall be screened with trees and other plantings as determined by the Planning Commission. 
(C)  Public Parks by their need to serve residents as well as employees of commercial and industrial enterprises shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts. If this paragraph is in conflict with other sections of the Zoning Code, this paragraph shall prevail. 
(Ord. 68-06. Passed 8-24-2006.) 
Sec. 1139.24. - Provisions for Sexually Oriented Business Establishments within the TOC Traffic Oriented Commercial District. 
Sexually oriented business establishments include adult cabarets, adult stores, or adult theaters primarily engaged in persons who appear nude/semi-nude, live performances, films or other visual representations adult booths, or sale or display of adult material. 
(A)  In addition to all other applicable development standards, no person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business establishment within 500 feet (as measured from property line to property line) of any residential use or district, school, preschool, daycare, place of worship, synagogue, park, library, federal, state, county, township, or city building, cemetery, or other civic use or public use (within the City of Marysville or other municipality). 
(B)  No person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business within 500 feet (as measured from property line to property line) of another sexually oriented business establishment. 
(C)  No person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business establishment within 500 feet (as measured from property line to property line) of any commercial establishment selling beer or alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
(D)  No person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business establishment within 500 feet (as measured from property line to property line) of any hotel or motel. 
(E)  No person shall permit the operation, location or establishment of more than one sexually oriented business on the same property, in the same building or structure, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 92-00. Passed 11-21-2000.) 
Sec. 1139.25. - Lighting requirements for OR, BR, NC, B-1, TOC, HMD, SD-1 Zoning Districts. 
Lighting Requirements for uses permitted in this district are set forth as follows: 
(A)  All exterior lighting shall be designed to direct light downwardly. 
(B)  All lights shall be arranged to reflect light away from any street or adjacent property. 
(C)  Direct or indirect glare into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians shall be avoided. 
(D)  Parking lot lighting shall be no higher than 28 ft. 
(E)  No permanent colored or flashing lights shall be used to light the exterior of buildings. 
(Ord. 47-03. Passed 11-6-2003.) 
Sec. 1139.26. - Sidewalks for residential dwelling units. 
All newly constructed residential dwelling units shall have sidewalks installed along all existing public streets if sidewalks do not presently exist. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the minimums set forth in the Standard Construction Drawings of the City. 
(Ord. 7-14. Passed 3-13-2014.) 
CHAPTER 1140. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Constitution reference- Ohio Constitution, Art. XVIII, Sec. 3 

Sec. 1140.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Landscape chapter is to apply standards that preserve the existing landscape, promote the planting and maintenance of landscape, and enhance the appearance of new developments by using landscape in the City of Marysville, and by so doing, protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and visitors to the community. 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.02. - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Ensure that buffering is provided between certain land uses, between thoroughfares and land uses, and between thoroughfares and off-street parking in order to reduce glare, unsightly views, and noise while improving the aesthetic environment of Marysville. 
(B)  Ensure that the location, configuration, and design of landscape are visually harmonious with land uses, buildings, thoroughfares, and off-street parking on the planned property or thoroughfare. 
(C)  Ensure the reduction of surface water runoff and contribute to air purification. 
(D)  Encourage efforts to preserve natural vegetation and protect existing trees and woodlands, wetlands, and other natural features. 
(E)  Encourage the planting of native plant species where practical and available. 
(F)  Require planting of street trees along public thoroughfares. 
(Ord. 53-12. Passed 11-15-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.03. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(A)  The Design Review Board, in accordance with Chapters 1136 and 1144, shall review and approve landscape plans as part of the a Certificate of Appropriateness or the Exterior Plan approval process for multi-family, commercial, office, and manufacturing developments. In the case of substantial expansions as defined by this chapter, the Zoning Inspector shall review and approved approve landscape plans as part of a Zoning Permit approval. 
(B)  The Planning Commission shall review and approve landscape plans for street trees as part of the preliminary plat process. 
(C)  The Design Review Board shall maintain an Approved Tree List for use as guidelines for meeting the provisions of this chapter. The "Approved Tree List" is a guideline and should be considered by the Design Review Board, Planning Commission, and Zoning Inspector when approving Landscape Plans. However, if determined appropriate, the Design Review Board, Planning Commission, or Zoning. Inspector may permit landscape materials or trees not specifically listed in the "Approved Tree List". 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.04. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are herewith defined. 
(A)  Board shall mean the Design Review Board as established in Chapter 1144. 
(B)  Crown Spread shall mean the distance measured across the greatest diameter of the above ground portions of a plant. 
(C)  Decorative Walls and Fences shall mean barriers constructed of wood, masonry or other appropriate material. 
(D)  Developed Area shall mean that a portion of a plot or parcel of land upon which a building, structure, pavement, landscaped material or other improvements, excluding public rights-of-way, have been placed. 
(E)  Diameter at Breast Height or DBH shall mean the diameter of the tree as measured at four and a half (41/2) feet above grade. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 41/2 feet above grade, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point below the split. 
(F)  Earth Mounds shall mean earthen physical barriers which block or screen a view, which have vegetation capable of preventing erosion, and have a maximum permitted slope of three feet horizontal to one vertical (3:1) where mounds are to be mowed. 
(G)  Ground Cover shall mean landscape materials such as natural mulch or low growing plants installed in such a manner so as to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
(H)  Interior Landscaping shall mean the use of landscape materials within the boundaries of the parcel, exclusive of the perimeter landscaping. 
(I)  Landscape shall mean the placement of landscape materials in the planting area in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(J)  Landscape Buffer shall mean landscape materials installed between certain land uses [i.e., (1) between multifamily and single family uses, (2) between any residential and commercial uses, and (3) between any manufacturing and residential or commercial use], between thoroughfares and land uses, and between thoroughfares and off-street parking in order to reduce glare, unsightly views, and noise. 
(K)  Landscape Material shall mean materials such as, but not limited to, living trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grasses, ground cover, landscape water features and non-living, durable material commonly used in landscaping, including, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, decorative walls and fences, earthen mounds, but excluding pavements or surfaces for vehicular use. 
(L)  Native Plant Species shall mean a plant species, other than noxious weeds, that are indigenous to the area and usually do not need human intervention to grow or reproduce. 
(M)  New Structure shall mean anything newly constructed or erected, except for fences, decks, signs, trash enclosures, swimming pools, playground equipment and accessory structures under 250 sq. ft., which requires location on the ground. Additions to, alterations to and/or reconstruction of an existing structure or building shall not be considered a new structure. 
(N)  Opacity shall mean the required percent of visual screening from adjacent properties in a vertical plane extending from the established grade to a required height. 
(O)  Parking Area or Structure shall mean an off-street area or structure for required parking or loading spaces, including driveways, access ways, aisles, parking and maneuvering space necessary for the parking or loading areas. 
(P)  Planting Area shall mean any area utilized for landscape material installation having a minimum area of fifty (50) square feet. 
(Q)  Plants shall mean living vegetation. Artificial plants are not included in this definition. 
(R)  Service Structures shall mean equipment or elements providing service to a building or a site including but not limited to loading docks, storage tanks, trash containers or receptacles, electrical transformers, utility vaults which extend above the surface, cooling towers, and heating and cooling units. 
(S)  Shrub shall mean a perennial plant which has persistent multiple woody stems from a common root and differing from a tree by its low stature and habit of branching from the base. 
(T)  Substantial Expansion shall mean when an existing structure or vehicular access area is expanded, altered, or enlarged where such expansion, alteration, or enlargement exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the existing structure or vehicular access area. 
(U)  Tree shall mean any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which normally grows to an overall height of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(V)  Tree, Large shall mean any tree which normally attains a mature height equal to or greater than forty (40) feet. 
(W)  Tree, Major shall mean an existing living tree with a DBH of at least eighteen (18) inches. 
(X)  Tree, Measurement of shall mean the diameter in inches of a tree trunk measured six (6) inches above grade for trees equal to or less than six (6) inches in diameter or measured at DBH for trees larger than six (6) inches in diameter. 
(Y)  Tree, Medium shall mean any tree which normally attains a mature height greater than twenty-five (25) feet and less than forty (40) feet. 
(Z)  Tree, Small shall mean any tree which normally attains a mature height greater than fifteen (15) feet and less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(AA)  Tree, Standard shall mean a tree planted with a trunk caliper (diameter) of at least one and 3/4 (13/4) inches measured 6 above grade. 
(BB)  Tree, Deciduous shall mean trees which normally shed their leaves in the fall. 
(CC)  Tree lawn shall mean that part of the street right-of-way not covered by sidewalk, bike path or other paving, lying between the sidewalk and street. 
(DD)  Vehicle Encroachment shall mean any protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area, storage area, access way, or access aisle into a landscape area. 
(EE)  Vehicular Use Area shall mean any paved surface area, excepting public rights-of-way, used by any type vehicle, whether moving or at rest for the purpose of (including but not limited to) driving, parking, loading, unloading, or storage. 
(Ord. 54-12. Passed 11-15-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.05. - Landscape plan requirements. 
(A)  Types of Requirements. 
(1)  New Structures. A zoning permit for construction of a new structure, or a vehicular use area shall be issued only after a landscape plan as required by this chapter has been submitted and approved. This requirement does not apply. to single-family residential uses. 
(2)  Substantial Expansions. A zoning permit for construction of a substantial expansion to a structure or vehicular use area shall be issued only after a landscape plan as required by this chapter has been submitted and approved. In the case of a substantial expansion to a structure or a vehicular use area, the site shall comply at a minimum with the required street trees to be planted along the public thoroughfare and the landscape requirements for vehicular use areas as required by this chapter. A landscape plan for a substantial expansion does not require Design Review Board approval and shall become part of a Zoning Permit application review process and shall require no additional fee beyond the Zoning Permit fee. If the Zoning Inspector determines that the street trees along the public thoroughfare or the landscaping for vehicular access areas are not practical due to topographic conditions or physical site limitations, the street trees may be planted in different locations on the site or reduced by size or number as approved by the Zoning Inspector. 
(3)  Preliminary Plats. Per Chapter 1105, a preliminary plat submitted for approval to the Planning Commission shall contain a landscape plan for streets as required by this chapter. 
(B)  Landscaping Plan Requirements. The landscape plan shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner and applicant. 
(2)  The zoning and specific land use for the property involved and for adjacent properties. 
(3)  A Site Plan to an appropriate scale showing: 
(a)  All existing and proposed buildings, structures, overhead and underground utilities, vehicular use areas, service structures, fences, mounds, storm water detention areas, drainage swales, or any other site feature. 
(b)  Existing major trees and vegetation or landscape features. Major trees are to be located, identified, and health condition noted. 
(c)  Existing major trees, vegetation, or landscape features to be removed. 
(d)  New landscaping to be installed as part of this project. The plan shall include a plant list that identifies all plants by species, common name, and size to be installed. Materials and vegetation shall be identified for all proposed landscaping. 
(e)  Dimensions of all planting areas. 
(f)  Dimensions of the perimeter distance of the vehicular use area. 
(g)  Location and plant name(s) of existing landscaping on any shared property line. 
(4)  Major trees preservation plan. 
(a)  All major trees shall be preserved, unless exempted, as follows: 
i.  The proposed structure or vehicular use area cannot be located in a manner to avoid removal of the tree while at the same time permitting desirable and logical development of the lot. 
ii.  The tree is damaged or diseased or otherwise is an undesirable species in its present location. 
(b)  All major trees identified for removal shall be replaced as follows: 
i.  It is encouraged that any tree identified for replacement be replaced with a similar type and variety, unless it is proven to be unfeasible or it is determined by staff to be undesirable. 
ii.  Each major tree larger than thirty (30) inches in diameter removed under this section shall be replaced by the owner/developer of the parcel with four (4) standard trees. 
iii.  Each major tree eighteen to thirty inches (18-30) in diameter shall be replaced with two (2) standard trees. Replacement trees for major trees removed shall be identified on landscape plan as such. 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.06. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1140.07 - Minimum landscape standards. 
The following landscape standards are required for new structures or substantial expansions unless the Design Review Board determines that the landscape standards are not practical due to topographic conditions or physical site limitations allowing the landscape materials to be planted in different locations on the site as approved by the Board. 
For the purpose of this section, property lines along a public alley shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
(A)  Perimeter Landscape Standards. Landscape buffering shall be required between multifamily and single family uses, between any residential and commercial uses, and between any manufacturing and residential or commercial use. Landscape buffering shall achieve and maintain a minimum of eighty (80) percent opacity, a height of at least six (6) feet, and a varied use of landscaping material. Fences and walls shall be no higher than six (6) feet in residential and commercial zoning districts and no higher than twelve (12) feet in manufacturing zoning districts. The plant material must achieve height and opacity requirements within four (4) years after installation. 
(B)  Landscape Requirements for Vehicular Use Areas. Public and private off street parking facilities and other vehicular use areas, except for single family and two (2) unit multifamily buildings, shall be landscaped in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Vehicular use area perimeter requirements. 
(a)  Setback Requirements. The front setback area for off-street parking shall consist of a ten (10) foot wide strip between the street right-of-way and the vehicular use area. Side and rear setbacks are to consist of a four (4) foot wide strip as measured from the property line to the vehicular use area. 
(b)  Screening Requirements. Vehicular use areas adjacent to a public street or private roadway shall be developed with plant, mounding, and/or fence material at least three (3) feet in height, except in line of sight triangles at driveway and street intersections where the height limit is two (2) feet, to conceal the view of parked cars from the street. Plant materials shall achieve the three (3) foot height within two (2) years of installation. All screening shall have a minimum opacity of eighty (80) percent at all times. 
(c)  In addition to the vehicular use area perimeter buffering requirement, one standard tree is to be planted for each seventy-five (75) feet of vehicular use area and/or parking area perimeter distance. 
(2)  Interior requirements. Within vehicular use areas with more than 20 parking spaces an area equal to a minimum of three (3) percent of the vehicular use area excluding perimeter landscape buffer areas shall be devoted to multiple planting areas which shall include a minimum of one standard tree plus other landscape material. For parking spaces not adjacent to islands or landscape bed areas with shade trees, every 25th space shall be made into a planting area and shall include one (1) standard tree. Planting areas for the interior requirements shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in size. In addition: 
(a)  The total planting area around a vehicular use area may be reduced by one hundred (100) square feet if such amount is relocated elsewhere to emphasize an entrance corridor or feature. 
(b)  In order that there shall be safe access to parking spaces, planting areas shall be arranged as to divide parking corridors and to limit "cross taxiing" through open parking spaces. 
(c)  Grass cover shall be planted on all portions of the interior planting areas not occupied by other landscape material. 
(d)  The minimum width of a landscape area where a tree or planting is planted shall be five (5) feet and the minimum distance from a tree or planting to a vehicular use area shall be two and one half (21/2) feet measured from the trunk of the tree or planting to the face of the curb. 
(e)  Planting area shall mean any area utilized for landscape material installation having a minimum area of fifty (50) square feet. 
(3)  Distribution adjustments. In areas where the Design Review Board has determined that strict application of this chapter will interfere with the function of the area, the required interior landscaping may be located to an area approved by the Board. For automotive or vehicle sales or dealerships and other uses where landscaping adversely impacts the operation of the use, the Design Review Board may approve the reduction or relocation of the number, size, or design of landscaping materials. 
(4)  Construction adjustments. If it is determined that during construction that exact landscaping placement as approved by the Design Review Board is not practical due to topographic or physical site limitations, the Zoning Inspector may permit the reallocation of the landscaping to a different location on the property. 
(C)  Intersection Clear Vision Requirements. To minimize traffic hazards, when an access way to a vehicular use area intersects a public right-of-way or where the property abuts the intersection of two (2) or more rights-of-way, all landscaping shall provide unobstructed visibility between two (2) feet and seven (7) feet in a line of sight triangular area bounded by a thirty (30) foot dimension along each access way edge, street edge, or curb and connecting the endpoints. Landscaping other than grass or ground cover shall not be located closer than four (4) feet from the edge of the access way pavement. Pursuant to subsection 1143.06(E) see appendix A for sight triangles at intersections. 
(D)  Street Trees and Public Tree Requirements. Street trees along public streets as part of a preliminary plat shall meet the guidelines established below and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission as part of the preliminary plat process. Street trees along public streets as part of a proposed development shall meet the guidelines below and shall be reviewed and approved by the Design Review Board or Zoning Inspector in the case of a substantial expansion as defined by this chapter. Street trees shall be required in all zoning districts, and in accordance with the following regulations. 
(1)  Street trees shall be planted along public streets in such a manner, type, quantity and location as approved by the Planning Commission, Design Review Board, or Zoning Inspector. Any existing street with undeveloped frontage shall also conform to these requirements at the time of the frontage development. 
(2)  The minimum trunk caliper measured at six (6) inches above grade for all street trees shall be no less than one and three-quarters (13/4) inches. 
(3)  Street trees shall be planted as per the following spacing requirements: 
Maximum Minimum Large Trees 1 per 60' of frontage 1 per 45' of frontage Medium Trees 1 per 50' of frontage 1 per 35' of frontage Small Trees 1 per 40' of frontage 1 per 25' of frontage  
(4)  The spacing between trees shall be adjusted to accommodate the location of driveways, fire hydrants, utility service lines, street lights, street signs, or any other permanent street fixtures. 
(5)  Tree locations shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from all stop and yield signs and ten (10) feet from fire hydrants or utility poles and fifteen (15) feet from all other street signs unless a reduced distance is proposed and approved by the City Engineer. 
(6)  Street trees shall be planted half the distance between the sidewalk and the edge of the street. When no sidewalks or curbs exist, the tree location shall be half the distance between the edge of the street and the right-of-way. 
(7)  A small tree shall be used when planting within ten (10) feet horizontal distance of overhead utility wires. A small or medium tree shall be used when planting between ten (10) and twenty (20) feet horizontal distance of overhead utility wires. 
(8)  If the Planning Commission, Design Review Board, or Zoning Inspector determines that the street trees along the public thoroughfare are not practical due to topographic conditions or physical site limitations, the street trees may be planted in different locations on the site or reduced by size or number as approved by the Planning Commission, Design Review Board, or Zoning Inspector. 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012; Ord. 64-14. Passed 9-11-2014.) 
Sec. 1140.08. - Installation and maintenance. 
(A)  Installation. All landscaping materials required on sites affected by this chapter shall be installed in accordance with industry accepted construction and planting procedures. 
(1)  The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued property maintenance of all landscaping materials planted or placed to fulfill the requirements of this chapter and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times. 
(2)  All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within six months, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first, while other defective non-plant landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three (3) months. 
(3)  Violations of these provisions shall be grounds for the City to refuse a zoning certificate of compliance and find that the owner is in violation of the zoning ordinance. Please refer to Chapter 1125.99. 
(B)  Maintenance. Publicly owned trees or privately owned trees located in or encroaching upon the public right-of-way shall conform to the following provisions: 
(1)  Persons providing services to public owned trees and/or providing utility line clearing services shall adhere to guidelines of the International Society of Arborists for tree maintenance and utility line clearance work. 
(2)  No person shall top any tree within the public right-of-way. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(3)  Tree limbs extending over a sidewalk shall be trimmed to such an extent that no portion of the same shall be less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. Tree limbs extending over streets shall be trimmed to such an extent that no portion of the same should be less than thirteen (13) feet above the roadway. 
(4)  The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs or portions thereof within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, and other public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the health of the plant material or the beauty of such public grounds. 
(5)  No person shall intentionally attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree or shrub, allow any liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees or shrubs to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit fire to bum when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree or shrub. 
(6)  Stumps shall be removed at least four (4) inches below grade. All residual material shall be removed from the site at the time the tree is removed and the grade shall be restored. 
(7)  Property owners are responsible for the maintenance of trees within the public right-of-way or tree lawn. In the event a tree(s) in the public right-of-way poses a risk of harm to public safety, the City reserves the right to remove the tree(s) in order to mitigate the risk of harm. Once a tree is removed from the tree lawn or right-of-way, the property owner shall replace the tree with a tree that is approved by the City's Public Service Department. The City Manager or his designee has the authority to waive or postpone the requirement to replace a tree that has been removed. 
(Ord. 63-12. Passed 12-20-2012; Ord. 48-15. Passed 12-3-2015.) 
Sec. 1140.09 - Landscaping required before final occupancy. 
(A)  Before a zoning certificate of compliance is issued, landscaping as approved by the Design Review Board, Planning Commission, and/or the Zoning Inspector or designee shall be installed, unless it is determined by the Zoning Inspector or designee that due to unforeseen circumstances or inclement weather that the approved landscaping cannot be installed prior to occupancy. In this case, a temporary zoning certificate of compliance may be issued in accordance with Chapter 1125. The City may require from the property or business owner a performance bond of sufficient amount to cover the remaining cost of materials and labor to install the landscaping. 
(B)  Failure to install landscaping as approved by the Design Review Board and/or Zoning Inspector is a violation of the zoning ordinance and is subject to the penalties in Section 1125.99. 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012.) 
Sec. 1140.10. - Appeal. 
Any person whose plan has been disapproved or who has otherwise been aggrieved by a decision of the Design Review Board, Zoning Inspector or designee may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Please refer to Chapter 1129. 
(Ord. 1-12. Passed 1-5-2012.) 
CHAPTER 1141. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference- Parking generally, Ch. 351; loading trucks,  351.09. 
State Law reference- Off-street parking facilities, ORC 717.05 et seq. 

Sec. 1141.01. - General requirements. 
(A)  No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered, or its use changed unless permanently maintained off-street parking and/or loading spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(B)  The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use, shall not apply to any existing building or structure. 
(C)  Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance is enlarged by fifty percent or more in floor area, number of employees, number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, such building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.02. - Parking space dimensions. 
Parking spaces shall conform to the following minimum area and dimensions exclusive of driveways and aisles: 
Minimum Width 
(Feet) Minimum Length 
(Feet) Parallel parking 9 23 Ninety degree parking 9 19 Sixty degree parking 10 19 Forty-five degree parking 12 19  
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.03. - Loading space requirements and dimensions. 
(A)  Whenever a use requires goods, merchandise, or equipment to be delivered to or shipped from that use, off-street loading and unloading areas shall be provided to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner. 
(B)  Loading spaces shall conform to the following minimum dimensions: 
(1)  Type A - (for semi-truck vehicles) fourteen feet width, fifty-five feet length, fifteen feet clearance. The space shall not inhibit service access to neighboring properties, facilities or loading areas. 
(2)  Type B - twelve feet width, thirty feet length, fifteen feet clearance, and arranged so as to not inhibit service access to neighboring properties, facilities or loading areas. 
(C)  Number of spaces required: 
Commercial and Industrial Uses Gross Floor Area Minimum Number and Type of Loading Space Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 0 Equal to or greater than 5,000 sq. ft. but less than 15,000 sq. ft. One Type B Equal to or greater than 15,000 sq. ft. but less than 30,000 sq. ft. One Type A Equal to or greater than 30,000 sq. ft. but less than 50,000 sq. ft. One Type A and one Type B For each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof One additional Type A  
  
Office/Public, Quasi Public Uses (Excluding Churches) Gross Floor Area Minimum Number and Type of Loading Space Less than 20,000 sq. ft. 0 Equal to or greater than 20,000 sq. ft. but less than 100,000 sq. ft. One Type A Equal to or greater than 100,000 sq. ft. but less than 350,000 sq. ft. Two Type A Equal to or greater than 350,000 sq. ft. Two Type A plus an additional Type A for each additional 300,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof  
(D)  Loading and unloading areas shall be located and designed so that the vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and from the public right-of-way, and complete the loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way, parking space or parking lot aisle. 
(E)  No area allocated for loading and unloading parking may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading parking. 
(F)  No loading space shall be located closer than fifty feet to any residential zoning district. This excludes spaces in an OR BR zoning district. 
(G)  A developer needs to only comply with this section to the extent reasonably possible when: 
(1)  A lot exists with one or more structures on it that were constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  A change of use is required that does not involve the enlargement of a structure. 
(3)  The loading requirement cannot be satisfied because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for loading and unloading. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.04. - Paving. 
(A)  The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth in Sections 1141.03 and 1141.12, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas, shall be curbed to City standards and contain a hard-surface of asphalt, concrete or a combination thereof, unless a viable or environmentally friendly solution is proposed and approved by the City Engineer. 
(B)  Exempt from the curbing requirement are driveways that connect a residential dwelling unit or garage with a street or thoroughfare and off-street parking areas for residential dwelling units that contain four (4) or fewer spaces. 
(Ord. 14-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1141.05. - Drainage. 
All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent properties or walkways. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.06. - Maintenance. 
The owner of property used for parking and/or loading shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust, trash and other debris. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.07. - Lighting, striping and traffic control. 
(A)  Any non-residential parking area with ten or more off-street parking spaces and any residential area with twenty or more off-street parking spaces shall be illuminated. All light fixtures shall be flat lenses and arranged to direct and reflect light away from any adjacent residential property and public right-of-way, and away from the sky above the light fixture. 
(B)  Any parking area with five (5) or more off-street parking spaces shall be clearly striped and maintained in good condition with lines four (4) inches wide. Striping shall be either white or yellow in color. Striping for spaces designated for handicap parking may be blue in color if approved by the City Engineer. The width of the parking spaces shall be computed from the centers of the striping. 
(C)  Parking of automobiles and/or recreational vehicles at permitted automobile dealerships that have outdoor storage and displays do not require lines or striping except for those spaces designated for employee and customer parking. 
(D)  Temporary parking areas for approved construction projects do not require lines or striping. Temporary parking areas shall only remain the duration of the construction project when permanent parking is not feasible. 
(E)  Any off-street parking area shall be marked or posted with such traffic control devices as may be determined necessary by the City Engineer and Police Chief for the protection of operators and pedestrians, including directional arrows, one-way signs, no parking signs and fire lane signs. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.08. - Location of parking spaces. 
The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street parking spaces and areas: 
(A)  Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve; 
(B)  Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses shall be located not more than 700 feet from the principal use; 
(C)  Parking spaces for apartments or similar residential uses shall be located not more than 300 feet from the principal use. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.09. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1141.10. - Wheel blocks. 
Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, sidewalk, landscape area or building, a wheel stop device consisting of blocks, a permanent curb, or other suitable restraint as approved by the City Engineer shall be installed to prevent any part of a parked motor vehicle from extending beyond the property line, overhanging a pedestrian walkway or sidewalk or damaging any building, structure or landscaping. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.11. - Width of driveway aisle. 
Driveway aisles serving parking spaces shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Minimum Width 
(Feet) Parallel parking 12 Ninety degree parking 25 Sixty degree parking 17.5 Forty-five degree parking 13  
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.12. - Parking space/stacking requirements. 
(A)  Floor Area. where floor area is designated as the standard for determining parking space requirements, the gross floor area of each floor shall be used. 
(B)  Seats. Where the number of seats is designated as the standard for determining parking space requirements, the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each 18 linear inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs or similar seating facilities shall be used. 
(C)  Employees. Where the number of employees is the standard for determining parking space requirements, employees shall mean the maximum total number of employees on any two successive shifts. 
(D)  Fractional Numbers. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number. 
(E)  Joint Use. 
(1)  A building or group of buildings containing two (2) or more uses even if a use in the building(s) is under the same ownership, operating during the same hours and which have different off-street parking requirements, may jointly provide spaces for not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use. 
(2)  Two or more non-residential uses may jointly provide and use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap, provided that a written agreement approved by the Zoning Inspector shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit. 
(F)  For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the following parking space requirements shall apply. 
(1)  Residential. 
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required (A) Corporate Guest Housing 1 space for each bedroom plus 1 space per employee (B) Family & Group Care Home 1 space per 4 residents plus 1 space per employee (C) Fraternity & Sorority Housing 1 space per occupant at maximum occupancy (D) Mobile Home 2 spaces per unit (see multi-family if there is more than one unit on the property) (E) Multi-family 2 spaces per unit plus guest parking at a rate of 1 space per 4 units (F) Retirement Villages & Senior Citizen Housing 1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 4 units (G) Single-family 2 spaces per unit (H) Two-family 2 spaces per unit (see multi-family if there is more than one structure on the property)  
(2)  Education/Places of Worship/Recreation Uses. 
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required (A) Cemeteries 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 4 seats in chapels (B) Colleges, Junior Colleges & Universities 1 space for every 3 students plus 1 space per employee of the 2 largest consecutive shifts (C) Community Centers, Libraries, Museums, Art Galleries, Garden and other establishments of historical, education and cultural interest 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area up to 2,000 sq. ft.; 1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area (or fraction thereof) over 2,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift (D) Daycare Centers & Nursery Schools 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 5 children at capacity (E) Elementary & Junior High Schools 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 2 classrooms (F) High Schools 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 5 students at capacity (G) Places of Worship 1 space per every 4 seats at capacity (H) Recreation Uses (indoor/outdoor) (1) Auditoriums, Arenas, Stadiums, Theaters, Gymnasiums and playing fields with stands 1 space for every 4 seats at capacity (2) Bowling Alleys 4 spaces for each lane plus 1 additional space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area used for restaurants, bars or similar uses plus l space for each employee on the largest shift (3) Golf Courses 4 spaces per hole plus 1 additional space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area for restaurants, clubhouses, or similar uses plus 1 space for each employee (4) Golf Driving Ranges 1 space per tee plus 1 space per employee (5) Recreation Centers 1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area; except those designed exclusively for senior citizens or youth under the age of 16, in which case there shall be 1 space for every 750 sq. ft. of gross floor area (6) Skating Rinks 1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area (7) Swimming pools (public, community or club 1 space for every 75 sq. ft. of water surface plus 1 space for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 sq. ft. of gross floor area used for seating, whichever is greater (8) Tennis/Racquetball & Handball Courts 4 spaces for each playing court plus 1 space for every 2 employees on the largest shift  
(3)  Business/Professional/Medical Offices. 
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required (A) Animal Hospitals, Veterinary Clinics & Kennels 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area (B) Hospitals & Medical Centers 1 space for every 2 beds plus 1 space for every employee on the largest shift (C) Medical & Dental Clinics 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area (D) Nursing & Personal Care Facilities including nursing homes, extended care facilities, rest homes and convalescent homes 1 space for every 6 beds plus 1 space for every employee on the largest shift (E) Offices, Public or Professional Administration, or Service Buildings 1 space for every 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area  
(4)  Retail Commercial and Services Uses. 
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required (A) Automotive, Boat, Recreational Vehicle Dealerships 1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space per service bay (B) Automotive Service and Repair 1 space for every 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 2 spaces for each service bay (C) Bank, Financial Institutions and Savings and Loan Associations 1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area (D) Barber Shops, Beauty Parlors or similar personal services 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area (E) Bed & Breakfast 2 spaces plus 1 space per rental unit (F) Bars & Drinking Places 1 space for every 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for every 50 sq. ft. of outdoor seating and/or patio area (G) Funeral Homes & Mortuaries 1 space for every 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area (H) Gas Stations 1 space for each 2 gas pumps plus 2 or each service bay (I) Grocery Stores, Retail & General Merchandise 1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area (J) Hotels & Motels 1 space per rental unit plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area for meeting, conference, restaurants, lounge areas or similar uses (K) Shopping Centers 1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area for buildings up to 40,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area or portion thereof for buildings over 40,000 sq. ft. (L) Eating Places (1) Full Service 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for every 100 sq. ft. of outdoor seating and/or patio area (2) Partial Service & Carry-Out Delivery 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for every 150 sq. ft. of outdoor seating and/or patio area (3) Drive-In 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for every 50 sq. ft. of outdoor seating and/or patio area  
 Full service shall be defined as any eating and drinking establishment with the sale or consumption of food and/or drink on the premises with less than fifty percent (50%) of the business intended for carry-out or delivery. 
 Partial service shall be defined as any eating and/or drinking establishment with the sale or consumption of food and/or drink on the premises with fifty percent (50%) or more of the business intended for carry-out or delivery. 
 In any case, vehicles shall not be permitted to wait within any public right-of-way for service at such drive-in or drive-thru facilities. 
(5)  Industrial. 
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required (A) Freight Terminals 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per vehicle stored on the premises (B) Manufacturing, Wholesaling, Processing and fabrication operations 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per vehicle stored on the premises (C) Warehousing 1 space per business vehicle plus: 
 1 space for every 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for buildings up to 20,000 sq. ft. 
 1 space for every 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for buildings 20,001 to 120,000 sq. ft. 
 1 space for every 10,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for buildings over 120,000 sq. ft.  
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1141.13. - General interpretations. 
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following rules shall govern: 
(A)  Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in this chapter shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Inspector. 
(B)  Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number. 
(C)  When a reason for parking demand is unusually low, then the parking space provisions cited above may be reduced proportionately by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Inspector. 
(Ord. 33-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
CHAPTER 1142. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION STRUCTURES 

Sec. 1142.01. - Legislative purposes. 
(A)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City. Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To direct the location of Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in the City into appropriate areas. 
(2)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(3)  To minimize adverse visual impacts of Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities through careful design, siting, and landscaping. 
(4)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of Towers and Antenna Support Structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use Towers. 
(5)  To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties caused by Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed and modified, are appropriately maintained and are fully removed when their use ceases. 
(6)  To the greatest extent feasible, ensure that Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(7)  To the greatest extent feasible, ensure that proposed Towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are designed in harmony with natural settings and in a manner consistent with current development patterns. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.02. - Applicability. 
(A)  All Towers, Antenna Support Structures and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, any portion of which are located within the City, are subject to this chapter. 
(B)  Except as provided in this chapter, any use being made of an existing Tower or Antenna Support Structure on the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use and shall be allowed to continue, even if in conflict with the terms of this chapter. Any Tower site that has received City approval in the form of either a special exception or zoning permit, but has not yet been constructed or located, shall be considered a Nonconforming Structure so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.03. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their meaning as otherwise defined in this Section. The words shall and will are mandatory and may or should are permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
(A)  Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
(B)  Antenna Support Structure means any building or other structure other than a Tower which can be used for location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(C)  Applicant means any Person that applies for a Zoning Permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(D)  Application means the process by which an Applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a Zoning Permit under the provisions of this chapter. An Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an Applicant to the City concerning such a request. 
(E)  City means the City of Marysville, a municipal corporation, in the State of Ohio, acting by and through its City Council. 
(F)  Code means the Code of Ordinances of the City. 
(G)  Co-location means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications provider. 
(H)  Conditional Use means a use, although often desirable, which will more intensely effect the surrounding area in which it is located than the permitted uses of zoning districts. A conditional use is allowed in a zoning district through a permit granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing and the meeting of conditions specified in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(I)  Council means the City Council. 
(J)  Emergency means a reasonably unforeseen occurrence with a potential to endanger personal safety or health, or cause substantial damage to property, that calls for immediate action. 
(K)  Engineer means any engineer licensed by the State of Ohio State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers. 
(L)  Engineer, Radio Frequency means an engineer who possesses the additional qualifications of holding a FCC General Radiotelephone Operator License and who has successfully completed training in electromagnetic field theory and antenna theory. 
(M)  Equipment Shelter means the structure in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility is housed. 
(N)  FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
(O)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
(P)  Height or Above Ground Level means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade at the base of the tower/structure to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
(Q)  Monopole means a support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation. 
(R)  Open Space means land devoted to a conservation or recreational purposes and/or land designated by a municipality to remain undeveloped (may be specified on a zoning map). 
(S)  Person is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 
(T)  Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, wireless telecommunications towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
(U)  Towers, Pre-existing and Pre-existing Antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(V)  Viewshed means the area surrounding a Wireless Telecommunications Facility or Antenna Support Structure, within which the Facility or Structure is visible from street level. 
(W)  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications as authorized by the FCC which a Person seeks to locate or has installed upon a Tower or Antenna Support Structure. However, the term Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which are located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category; 
(3)  Antennas used by amateur radio operators are excluded from this definition. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.04. - General requirements applicable to all wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(A)  Wireless Telecommunication Facilities are either permitted uses or conditional uses in a variety of zoning districts contingent upon a number of requirements being met. Specifically, they shall be permitted uses in the following: Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC), Special District One (SD1), Light Manufacturing (M-1), and Heavy Manufacturing (M-2) and conditional uses in Service Business District (B-1), Central Business District (B-3) and Hospital Medical District (HMD). In addition, such facilities are permitted uses in all other districts on property owned by the City, County, State of Ohio or School District where structure on which the antenna will be located exists at the time of placement of the antenna and subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  The following requirements apply to all Wireless Telecommunication Facilities regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located. These general standards are to be supplemented with the specific regulations for permitted and conditional uses as set forth in Sections 1142.05 through 1142.08 herein. 
(1)  Natural Resource Protection Standards. The location of the Tower and Equipment Shelter and Antenna Support Structure shall comply with all natural resource protection standards established in the Zoning Code, including those for floodplain, wetlands and steep slopes. 
(2)  Security Enclosure Required. Security fencing eight feet in height shall surround the Tower, Equipment Shelter and any guy wires, either completely or individually as determined by the Planning Commission. The City and co-locaters shall have reasonable access. No fence shall be required on top of a building or other structure if access to the roof or top of the structure or building is secure. 
(3)  Existing Vegetation and Buffer Plantings. Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Buffer plantings may be located around the perimeter of the security enclosure as deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission upon recommendation of the Design Review Board. Options are an evergreen screen to be planted that consists of either a hedge, planted three feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted five feet on center maximum, or other screens determined to be appropriate by the Planning Commission. 
(4)  Co-Location. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to the co-location requirements as specified in Section 1142.08. 
(5)  Historic or Architectural Standards Compliance. Any application to locate a Wireless Telecommunication Facility on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register, or is in an historic district, shall be subject to review by the City's Design Review Board where applicable. 
(6)  Advertising Prohibited. No advertising is permitted anywhere on the Wireless Telecommunication Facility, with the exception of identification signage as governed by Chapter 1143 - Signs. 
(7)  Artificial Lighting Restricted. No Tower shall be artificially lighted except to assure safety or as required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
(8)  Access Control and Emergency Contact. "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with a telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency. 
(9)  Construction Standards. Monopole towers only are permitted. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers are published by the Electronics Industry Association as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty days shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(10)  Color and Appearance Standards. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, and/or by historical or architectural standards imposed under Section 1142.04(B)(5) of this Zoning Ordinance. All appurtenances shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment. 
(11)  Abandonment. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to the abandonment requirements set forth in Section 1142.10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(12)  Setback from Edge of Roof. Any wireless telecommunication facility and its appurtenances permitted on the roof of a building shall be set back one foot from the edge of the roof for each one foot in height of the wireless telecommunication facility. However, this setback requirement shall not apply to antennas that are less than two inches in thickness mounted to the sides of antenna support structures and do not protrude more than six inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. This requirement is subject to change by the Planning Commission upon the review of the photo simulation provided in compliance with Section 1142.09(C). 
(13)  State or Federal Requirements. All towers and antenna must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(14)  Non-Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(15)  License to Operate. Owners and/or operators of towers and antennas shall submit copies of all franchises, certifications, licenses, and permits required by law for the design, construction, location, operation, and discontinuance of operation of wireless communications in the City limits of the City of Marysville. Owners and/or operators shall be required to maintain the towers and antennas and to provide evidence of renewal and extension thereof when granted. 
(Ord. 69-06. Passed 8-24-2006.) 
Sec. 1142.05. - Non-residential districts. 
(A)  Where a proposed Wireless Telecommunication Facility is a permitted use, they are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Sole Use on a Lot. 
(a)  Minimum Lot Size: as specified in Chapter 1137 for the appropriate zoning district. 
(b)  Minimum Yard Requirements. 
Tower: No tower shall be located a distance less than its height plus 10 feet from the nearest property line. 
Equipment Shelter: The minimum setbacks and yard requirements for principal structures shall apply and such shelter shall not be located above ground in any required front or side yard. 
(c)  Maximum Height. 
Tower: Two hundred feet (200') (includes antenna). 
Equipment Shelter: As specified in Chapter 1137 for the appropriate zoning district as an accessory building. 
(d)  Maximum Size of Equipment Shelter: Four hundred (400) square feet for a single shelter or, if there is more than one, eight hundred (800) total square feet. 
(2)  Accessory: A Wireless Telecommunication Facility is permitted on a property with an existing use subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The existing or future use on the property may be any permitted or approved conditional use in the district, and need not be affiliated with the wireless telecommunication provider provided all setback and lot size/distance requirements are met. 
(b)  The Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance (except during construction or an emergency). 
(c)  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be the area needed to accommodate the Tower (and guy wires, if used), the Equipment Shelter, security fencing and buffer planting. 
(d)  Minimum Yard Requirements. 
Tower: No tower shall be located a distance less than its height plus 10 feet from the property line, or nearest building on adjacent property. 
Equipment Shelter: Shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the primary lot. 
(e)  Access. The service access to the Equipment Shelter shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use. 
(f)  Maximum Height. 
Tower: Two hundred feet (200') (includes antenna) 
Equipment Shelter: Shall comply with the accessory building requirements applicable to the primary lot. 
(g)  Maximum Size of Equipment Shelter. Four Hundred (400) square feet for a single shelter, or, if there is more than one, eight hundred (800) square feet. 
(3)  Combined with an Existing Structure: Where possible, an antenna for a Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall be attached to an existing structure or building subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Maximum Height. Twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the building height above the existing building or structure, whichever is greater. 
(b)  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate Equipment Shelter (not located on, or attached to, the building) the Equipment Shelter shall comply with the following: 
i.  The minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
ii.  A buffer yard may be planted in accordance with Chapter 1140. 
iii.  Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use. 
iv.  The maximum size of the Equipment Shelter shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet, or, if there is more than one, eight hundred (800) square feet. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.06. - Located in open space. 
A Wireless Telecommunication Facility is permitted on land that has been established as permanent Open Space, athletic field, or a park subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  The Open Space shall be owned by the municipality, county or state government or school board. 
(B)  Maximum Height. 
Tower: Two hundred feet (200') (includes antenna); 
Equipment Shelter: (include the maximum building height for the district). 
(C)  The maximum size of the Equipment Shelter shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet, or, there is more than one, eight hundred (800) square feet. 
(D)  The Tower shall be set back from any residential zoning district line the height of the tower plus 10 feet. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.07. - Criteria for a conditional use. 
(A)  A Wireless Telecommunication Facility which includes a Tower may be permitted as a conditional use in Service Business Districts (B-1), Central Business Districts (B-3) and Hospital Medical Districts (HMD). In addition, a Wireless Telecommunication Facility which includes a tower may be permitted as a conditional use in all other districts provided that all other conditions of this section are met. In order to be considered for review, the Applicant must prove that a newly constructed Tower is necessary because co-location on an existing Tower is not feasible in accordance with Section 1142.08. The following steps must also be taken for the application to be considered for review in this category: 
(1)  The Applicant shall demonstrate that the telecommunications Tower must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area. There shall be an explanation of why a Tower and this proposed site is technically necessary. 
(2)  Where the Wireless Telecommunication Facility is located on a property with another principal use, the Applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property supports the application and that vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
(3)  The Applicant shall present a site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the Wireless Telecommunication Facilities on the site; showing the location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; and indicating type and locations of plant materials used to screen the facilities and the proposed color of the facilities. 
(4)  Applicant shall present a signed statement indicating: 
(a)  The Applicant agrees to allow for the potential co-location of additional Wireless Telecommunication Facilities by other providers on the Applicant's structure or within the same site location; and 
(b)  That the Applicant agrees to remove the facility within one hundred eighty (180) days after the site's use is discontinued. 
(B)  The conditional use requirement in zoning districts other than Service Business District (B-1), Central Business District (B-3) and Hospital Medical District (HMD) does not apply on land owned by the City, County, State of Ohio or School Board where structures on which the antenna will be located exist at the time of placement of the antenna. 
(C)  A Conditional Use Permit must be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals following the procedures outlined in Chapter 1129. Co-location of antennas on a single Tower, antennas attached to existing structures/buildings, Towers located in industrial districts, or replacement Towers to be constructed at the site of a current Tower are permitted uses and will not be subject to the Conditional Use permitting process. 
(D)  Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a Wireless Telecommunication Facility and/or Tower shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.08. - Co-location requirements. 
(A)  Public Property First. 
(1)  In order to encourage the location of Wireless Telecommunication Facilities on publicly owned property, the City shall undertake an identification of publicly owned properties that the City determines are suitable for such use. The City shall regularly update such identification and make the results of such identification available to the public. 
(2)  Persons locating Wireless Telecommunication Facilities upon such identified publicly owned properties shall be exempted from the requirements herein regarding presentation of proof that co-location of facilities on Towers or structures owned by other Persons or in other locations is not available. However, Persons locating Wireless Telecommunication Facilities on publicly owned properties shall continue to be subject to the requirements contained in Paragraph B below. 
(3)  In addition, Persons locating Wireless Telecommunication Facilities on publicly owned properties identified by the City to be suitable for such purposes shall be exempt from the requirement of Section 1142.07(A)(2) through (A)(4). 
(B)  No new Tower shall be constructed in the City unless such Tower is capable of accommodating at least one additional Wireless Telecommunication Facility owned by other Persons. 
(C)  A Conditional Use Permit shall be issued only if there is not technically suitable space reasonably available on an existing Tower or structure within the geographic area to be served. With the permit application, the applicant shall list the location of every Tower, building, or structure within such area that could support the proposed antenna. The Applicant must demonstrate that a technically suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing Tower, building or structure. If another communication Tower is technically suitable, the applicant must show that it has offered to allow the owner to co-locate an antenna on another Tower within the City owned by the applicant on reciprocal terms and the offer was not accepted or the other Tower is presumed to be reasonably available. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.09. - Application and review requirements. 
(A)  Required Information for Applications. All applications for wireless telecommunication facilities, including towers, shall include the information required under this Section. 
(B)  Plot Plan Required. When a proposed wireless telecommunications facility or antenna support structure is to include a new tower, a plot plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall be submitted. This plot plan shall indicate all building and land uses within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed facility. Aerial photos and/or renderings may augment the plot plan. A diagram or map showing the Viewshed of the proposed Wireless Telecommunication Facilities or Antenna Support Structures shall be provided. 
(C)  Photo Simulations Required. Photo simulations of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility from affected residential properties and public rights-of-way taken at varying distances shall be provided. 
(D)  Proof Why Residential Tower Location is Mandatory. In applying for authorization to erect a tower within any residential district, the applicant must present sufficient evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate such tower in a more appropriate non-residential zone. This evidence shall be reviewed by the City of Marysville. If the City of Marysville refutes the evidence, then the tower is not permitted. 
(E)  Technical Necessity. The applicant shall demonstrate that the telecommunication tower must be located where it is proposed in order to provide adequate coverage to the applicant's service area. There shall be an explanation of why a tower and the proposed site is technically necessary. 
(F)  Review by Radio Frequency Engineer. The evidence submitted by the applicant shall be reviewed by a radio frequency engineer, who will support or refute the evidence. If such engineer is retained by the City, fees for such engineer's service shall be reimbursed to the City by the applicant prior to issuance of the zoning permit. 
(G)  Landowner Support and Access. Where a wireless telecommunication facility is located on a property with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property supports the application and vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
(H)  Required Site and Landscaping Plan. The applicant shall present a site and landscaping plan showing the following: 
(1)  Specific placement of the wireless telecommunication facility on the site. 
(2)  The location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features. 
(3)  Type and locations of plant materials used to screen the facilities. 
(4)  The proposed color of the facilities. 
(I)  Co-Location and Removal Agreement. The applicant shall present signed statements indicating that: 
(1)  The applicant agrees to allow for the potential co-location of additional wireless telecommunication facilities by other providers on the applicant's structure, and 
(2)  The applicant agrees to remove the facility within one hundred and eighty (180) days after it use is discontinued. 
(J)  Denial by Jurisdiction. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a wireless telecommunication facility and/or tower shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.10. - Abandonment of tower. 
(A)  Required Notification. All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the Zoning Inspector notifying them of any Tower facility located on the municipality whose use will be discontinued and the date this use will cease. A copy of the notice to the FCC will suffice. If at any time the use of the facility is discontinued for one hundred and eighty days, a designated local official may declare the facility abandoned. (This excludes any dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the facility.) The facility's owner I operator will receive written notice from the Zoning Inspector and be instructed to either reactivate the facility's use within one hundred and eighty (180) days, or dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not occur, the municipality will remove or will contract to have removed the facility and assess the owner/operator the costs. 
(B)  Required Notice To Owner. The City must provide the Tower owner three (3) months' notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Board of Zoning Appeals before initiating such action. After such notice has been provided, the City shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to either acquire the Tower and any appurtenances attached thereto at the then fair market value, or in the alternative, order the demolition of the Tower and all appurtenances. 
(C)  Right to a Public Hearing. The City shall provide the Tower owner with the right to a public hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, which public hearing shall follow the three (3) month notice required in subsection (B). All interested parties shall be allowed an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. 
(D)  Order of Abatement or Demolition. After a public hearing is held pursuant to subsection (C), the Commission may order the acquisition or demolition of the Tower. The City shall require Licensee to pay for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish the Tower. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.11. - Variances and special exceptions. 
Any request to deviate from any of the requirements of this chapter shall require variance approval in conformance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1129 of the City Code. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
Sec. 1142.12. - Miscellaneous. 
(A)  Non-Waiver. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from exercising any right or remedy it may have in law or equity to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(B)  Severability. If any provision of this chapter or the Application of any provision of this chapter to any Person is, to any extent, held invalid or unenforceable by a tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter and the application of such provision to other Persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such holding. In case of such an event, this chapter and all of its remaining provisions shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective. In the event the law invalidating such an chapter provision is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or is otherwise changed so that the provision which had previously been held invalid or unenforceable, no longer conflicts with the laws, rules or regulations then in effect, the previously invalid or unenforceable provision shall return to full force and effect. 
(Ord. 34-98. Passed 5-28-1998.) 
CHAPTER 1143. - SIGNS[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of billboards and signs, ORC 715.27(A); power to regulate advertising, ORC 715.65. 

Sec. 1143.01. - Intent. 
Sign regulations, including provisions to control the type, design, size, location and maintenance thereof, are hereby established in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes: 
(A)  To enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without difficulty or confusion; 
(B)  To provide a safe environment by prohibiting conditions hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(C)  To protect property values, public investment and overall neighborhood character by preventing conditions that have undesirable impacts on surrounding properties; 
(D)  To permit enforcement and prosecution of the regulations in this chapter, and to create a system of variances and appeals to allow exceptions where justified by hardship; 
(E)  To identify locations of development and economic activity by permitting signs appropriate to the land use and zoning district of each parcel while insuring that signs will be harmonious with their surroundings. 
(F)  To support the creation and existence of businesses so that additional jobs and services are available to Marysville. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.02. - Compliance required; exceptions. 
(A)  No sign or street graphic may be erected, displayed, substantially altered or relocated except in conformance with this chapter. 
(B)  Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of a governmental function or as required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation are excluded. However, compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter to the extent practical is encouraged. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.03. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall be interpreted according to the following definitions. 
(A)  Sign or street graphic means any display, figure, painting, placard, poster, drawing, letter, word, symbol, number, or any combination of these or any other device visible, with or without verbiage, which can be seen from the right-of-way and is designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign or street graphic is located. Used to convey a message, advertise, inform or direct attention to a person, institution, organization, activity, place, object or product. 
(B)  Sign panel means a structural object or portion of a structural object designed to form a distinct background area or frame for the display of a sign's information. 
(C)  Signs by Use Type. For the purpose of determining permitted signs, all signs are classified by use type and defined as follows: 
(1)  Billboard means a sign, of any size, directing attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment or other activity sold, offered or conducted elsewhere than upon the lot on which the sign is located for public service and information or for political advertising. 
(2)  Bulletin board means a sign for the display of announcements of a public or semipublic institution and located on the grounds of the institution. 
(3)  Business sign means a sign containing product advertisements or other detailed information about the operation of a business. Specifically, such sign is one which contains brand names of goods sold or services rendered on the premises, a listing of numerous specific types of goods or services, prices or special sale information, telephone number or other similar information. A business sign may also include items permitted on an identification sign. 
(4)  Directional sign is an on-premise sign used to direct vehicles to parking areas or indicate points of entry or exit for a facility or off-street parking lot. Such signs may contain information such as Lot A , Green Lot , in , enter , entrance , out , exit , do not enter or similar directives. Such signs shall not include any business information other than the business logo and/or name. 
(5)  Educational/Public Service sign is a sign designed to provide information on school or public events, community recognition and/or promotes information about good health and safety. 
(6)  Identification sign means generally, a sign identifying or naming a business institution, residential development or other use. Specifically, such sign may indicate the name, owner, or manager and address of an existing building, business or other use, including the general type of goods sold or services rendered, but without a listing of numerous specific goods or services and without reference to brand names, prices, sales or telephone numbers. 
(7)  Information window/wall sign means window or wall signage bearing only information about entry and exit, business hours, authorized service representative information and/or discount, credit systems accepted in that establishment (e.g., American Express, MasterCard, Visa, Golden Buckeye Card, etc.), and business directives (e.g., no soliciting, no firearms, etc.). 
(8)  Logo or trademark means a letter or group of letters (usually stylized) or a symbol or symbols that represent a word, group of words, or business name. Usually used as part of a business identification scheme that is meant to identify goods, products, services or a business entity itself. 
(9)  Nameplate means a sign indicating the name, address and/or profession of a person or persons occupying a residence, excluding name and address on mail box. 
(10)  Off-premise sign . See definition of Billboard . 
(11)  Open/Closed sign means a window or wall sign bearing only information indicating if the business is open or closed. This does not include the hours of operation. Signs that include both the open/closed information and the hours of operation shall be deemed to be an information sign. 
(12)  Political sign are signs having reference to a political official, candidate, question, issue or opinion. 
(13)  Real Estate/Model Home sign means a temporary sign promoting the development, construction, rental, sale or lease of property. 
(14)  Sold sign means a temporary sign announcing that a property has been sold, leased or is no longer available. 
(15)  Temporary sign means a sign intended for use for a limited period of time. 
(D)  Signs by Structural Type. For the purpose of determining permitted signs, all signs are classified by structural type and defined as follows: 
(1)  Awning sign means a nonilluminated sign affixed flat to the surface of an awning (known as the base material) or which does extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of such an awning. 
(2)  Banner means a temporary sign composed of light weight material not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the sign caused by the movement of the atmosphere. Includes those used to announce open houses, grand openings, make special announcements, or communicate events. 
(3)  Canopy signs means a sign attached to or painted on the fascia or hanging from the soffit of a canopy or covered entrance or attached to a permanent awning or marquee. Mansard roofs shall be considered as canopies. 
(4)  Changeable copy sign (automatic) means a sign or portion thereof on which the copy changes automatically or animation is displayed through electrical or electronic means (e.g., time and temperature units and message centers); considered a business sign. 
(5)  Changeable copy sign (manual) means a sign or portion thereof on which copy is changed manually through placement of letters or symbols on a sign panel; considered a business sign. 
(6)  Freestanding sign means a sign which is not attached to a building and which is either attached directly to the ground or elevated on a supporting structure attached to the ground. 
(7)  Logo flag means a sign made of flag-like material containing a logo or identifying symbol. 
(8)  Portable sign means a sign which is designed to be moved and is not permanently attached to any part of a building or to the ground. 
(9)  Portable Sidewalk Sign means any portable or freestanding sign displayed on a sidewalk in front of a business or other enterprise and taken inside at night or when the associated business or enterprise is closed. 
(10)  Projecting sign means a sign erected on the outside wall of a building and projecting out at an angle therefrom. 
(11)  Roof sign means a sign erected upon and either partially or completely over the roof of any building. 
(12)  Vehicular sign means a sign mounted upon, painted upon, or otherwise erected on a trailer, truck, automobile or other vehicle parked or placed so that the signs thereon are visible from a public street or right-of-way. 
(13)  Wall sign means a sign integral with or painted on the exterior face of an exterior wall of a building or structure, or attached to the wall, and parallel with the wall and projecting not more than fifteen inches therefrom. 
(14)  Window sign means a sign painted, attached or affixed to the interior or exterior surface of windows or doors of a building or suspended on the inside or outside of the windows or doors. 
(E)  Unit of a building or building unit refers to a space occupying a portion of a building, containing an entrance from the building exterior, and separated from other such spaces by a party wall or walls. 
(F)  Panel sign means a sign which is mounted, attached, painted, or displayed on a sign panel. 
(G)  Nonpanel sign means a sign which is not mounted, attached, painted or displayed on a sign panel. 
(H)  Community facilities means existing, planned and proposed parks, play grounds, schools and other public lands and buildings of the City, County or school district as well as churches. 
(I)  Subdivision has the same meaning as defined in Section 1101.02(A)(34). 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 15-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.04. - Measurement standards. 
Sign face area, sign height and sign location, as regulated in this chapter, shall be measured according to the following standards. 
(A)  Sign Face Area. Standards for computing the amount of sign face area permitted by these regulations are established as follows: 
(1)  Measurement of sign face area. 
(a)  Panel signs. For two-sided signs, only one side shall be included in the measurement. Measurement of sign face area shall include the actual panel area and shall include structural supports of the panel only if such supports are designed and used to convey part of the sign's message. 
(b)  Nonpanel signs. Sign face area shall be measured to include the surface area of the smallest rectangles enclosing the words, characters, logos and designs of the sign but not the individual letters of the sign. Only one side of a two-sided sign shall be included in the measurement. Measurement of sign face area shall include structural supports of the sign only if such supports are designed and used to convey part of the sign's message. In the case of nonpanel signs consisting of upper and lower case letter forms, calculation of overall square footage shall be obtained by multiplying the height of lower case letters (excluding ascenders and descenders) times the length. 
(2)  Measurement of building and lot frontage. 
(a)  Building frontage. The frontage of a building shall be the width of the facade(s) of the building which faces the principal street or contains the main entrance. If a building is divided into units, the building unit frontage shall be the width of that unit, as measured from the party wall center lines, on the frontage of the building. In instances where a person, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity occupies more than one building unit and each building unit supports the principal business of the occupant and where: 
i.  The building units are contiguous; or 
ii.  The building units are located on the same lot; 
Then the provisions of this chapter shall apply as if there were only one building unit. In such cases the building frontage shall include the total building frontage of the individual contiguous building units or the building frontage of the principal building where the individual building units are not contiguous. 
(b)  Lot frontage. The frontage of a lot shall be the number of lineal feet the lot abuts on the principal street as measured at and along the right-of-way line. 
(B)  Sign Height. The height of free-standing signs shall be measured from the base of the sign at its point of attachment to the ground to its topmost element. However, if the support of a free-standing sign is attached to a wall or other man-made base, including a graded earth mound, or if the point of attachment to the ground is lower than the grade of the nearest street, the sign height shall be measured from the grade of the nearest street, drive or parking area, as determined by the Zoning Inspector. 
(C)  Sign Location. In determining the location of signs in relation to lot lines, including district and street lines, distances shall be measured from the vertical projection of the lot lines to the closest point of the sign. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.05. - Secondary entrances. 
(A)  Buildings or building units with lot frontage on two or more public streets may be permitted signs and sign area in addition to that otherwise permitted based upon the following: 
(1)  A building or building unit with frontage and a customer building entrance from a rear or side parking lot shall be permitted total additional wall, window or canopy signs not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of all sign area otherwise permitted. Such additional signs shall not exceed the number of signs permitted for the principal facade and street. This exception applies once and is not intended to be "per frontage" if a building or building unit has more than two frontages. Additional free-standing identification signs are not permitted unless certain other criteria are met as outlined in the following paragraph of this section. This provision shall also apply to buildings or building units with secondary frontage adjoining a freeway right-of-way. In no case shall the total square footage of all signs exceed 300 square feet. 
(2)  For buildings or building units with frontage on more than one street and where the parking area is served by more than one vehicular entrance on the second street, one additional free-standing identification sign shall be permitted at each vehicular entrance if the minimum distance between any two such signs is 500 feet as measured along the right-of-way. In no case shall the total square footage of all signs exceed 300 square feet. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.06. - Design standards. 
In order to facilitate information, legibility, traffic safety and general economic vitality, signs should be designed in a manner compatible with the character and style of the buildings on which they are located, adjoining buildings, and neighboring signs; in terms, color, materials and size. Furthermore, signs shall be designed to be structurally sound and located so as to pose no hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. More specifically, signs shall be designed in accordance the following standards. Use of the term should in place of shall indicates that a standard is a recommendation and not a mandatory regulation. 
(A)  Free-Standing Signs. Sign panels on free-standing signs shall face no more than two directions. The distance between parallel, back-to-back sign panels shall be no greater than three feet. If a V shaped sign, the angle between sign faces, as measured at the point of intersection, shall not exceed sixty degrees. 
(B)  Construction. All signs and supporting structures shall be such as to withstand a pressure of thirty pounds per square foot. All electrical wiring, fittings and material used in construction and operation of signs shall conform to the codes and specifications of the City of Marysville to the extent the specifications are in effect or to the applicable codes of the State of Ohio if none exist in the City of Marysville. 
(C)  Vertical Clearance. The lowest element of any sign, except for projecting signs, which occupies vertical space above a pedestrian or vehicular way and is designed to permit traffic thereunder shall be at least ten feet above the finished grade of a sidewalk or other pedestrian way and at least sixteen feet above the finished grade of a pavement used for vehicular traffic if such sign is located within eighteen inches of the vertical projection of the pavement edge. Awnings or canopies displaying signs shall meet the clearance standards of Section 1139.13, "Architectural Projections". 
(D)  Relation to Traffic Devices. Unless regulated otherwise in the codes of the City, signs shall not be erected so as to obstruct sight lines along any public way, traffic control lights, street name signs at intersections, or street sight lines or signals at railroad or grade crossings. Signs visible from the sight lines along a street shall not contain symbols or words such as "stop", "go", "slow", etc., or red or green lights that resemble traffic signs or devices. 
(E)  Visibility at Intersections. Signs shall be located and designed so as to maintain a substantially clear view between two and one-half feet and eight feet above grade in a triangle formed by intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line thirty feet from the point where the street lines intersect. At the intersection of a driveway and public street, such triangle shall be defined by the street right-of-way line, the driveway pavement edge and a line ten feet from the point of intersection. 
(F)  Improper Content. No building or structure in any zoning district shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk or public or private right-of-way. No portion of the exterior of any building or structure shall contain any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any adult material, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. This section shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material, decoration, or sign, to any performance, show or special event, and to any window, door, or other opening. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 34-12. Passed 6-28-2012; Ord. 9-13. Passed 3-14-2013; Ord. 27-13. Passed 6-27-2013.) 
Sec. 1143.07. - Illumination of signs. 
Light sources to illuminate signs shall be shielded from all adjacent residential buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness or intensity so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers, or so as to cause reasonable objection from adjacent residential districts. Flashing, moving or intermittent illumination shall not be permitted. In ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts only nameplates and bulletin boards may be illuminated. All signs in other districts may be illuminated. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.08. - Exceptions and prohibited signs. 
(A)  Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not govern the display of the following signs: 
(1)  The American, Ohio and Marysville flags and flags of other nations or nationality groups (except where used as part of a sign advertising a product or service); 
(2)  Governmental signs providing traffic control information and similar public information; 
(3)  Signs which are part of the original construction of a vending machine, fuel pump or similar device; 
(4)  Any monument within a cemetery; 
(5)  Cornerstones and permanent building plaques displaying the date of construction, architect's name, building name, historical information, etc., and not exceeding eight square feet in area; 
(6)  Signs in non-residential districts displaying only a street address and not exceeding two square feet in area; 
(7)  Signs on vehicles that are regularly and customarily used to transport persons or property for a business; 
(8)  Logo flag that is mounted on a flag pole with no other flag on the same pole, containing identification information (logo); not to exceed twenty-four square feet. 
(9)  Other signs determined to be outside this chapter's scope of regulation with respect to a reasonable and custody interpretation of intent. 
(B)  Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in any zoning district unless specifically permitted by definition or use as provided for elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Moving, flashing and animated signs of any sort, including revolving signs, streamers, ribbons, pennants, spinners, and/or other similar moving devices; except for streamers, ribbons and pennants used for a length of time not to exceed fifteen days to call attention to initial openings of businesses in A-R, B-R, B-1, B-3, O-R, TOC and SD-1 Zoning Districts. 
(2)  Billboards as defined in Section 1143.03(C)(1) except as described in 1143.09. 
(3)  Roof signs as defined in Section 1143.03(D)(11). 
(4)  Portable signs as defined in Section 1143.03(D)(8), except for temporary portable, on-premises signs as described in Sections 1143.09 and 1143.091. 
(5)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs and signals. 
(6)  Off-premise real estate directional signs; however, temporary Open House signs in place for a period of time not to exceed twelve hours are permitted. 
In no case shall these signs be placed on public property including but not limited to City parks, rights-of-way, street signs (including stop signs) or utility poles. 
(7)  Signs which create a visibility hazard or impair the future utilization or expansion of public streets. 
(8)  Any sign that is installed, erected or attached in any form, slope or manner to a fire exit or any door or window giving access to any fire escape unless specifically to identify the fire escape or exit as approved and required by the Fire Prevention Officer. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 57-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.09. - Temporary signage. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  No temporary sign shall be erected or located in the City right-of-way unless otherwise stated below. All temporary signs shall be prepared in a professional manner with all copy being clearly legible. For any person or firm displaying a temporary sign without first obtaining a permit the fee shall be doubled. No temporary sign permit shall be issued to any person or business found to have violated the provisions of this sign code two or more times in any twelve (12) month period. 
(2)  No more than a total of four (4) signs, for other organizations that are permitted elsewhere in this section, shall be placed upon any one property (excluding window signs). In no instance shall the total square footage of these signs exceed a maximum of twenty (20) square feet. 
(3)  No signage shall be displayed on any vacant property or vacant store front except for: 
(a)  "Coming Soon" signs. 
(b)  Real Estate signs as permitted by zoning district. 
(c)  Other signage as listed below if written permission is given by the property owner and supplied to the City. 
(4)  Identification of Sponsors on Temporary Signs: 
(a)  Shall be permitted only on temporary signs for non-profit organizations. 
(b)  Sponsorship area shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the total sign area. 
(B)  Temporary signs shall be permitted only for signs meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  Sports/Organization registration signs. 
(a)  For non-profit organizations only (must show proof of non-profit status). 
(b)  One sign permitted per lot. 
(c)  Can display a maximum of 25 signs city wide. 
(d)  Maximum size of four (4) square feet is permitted. 
(e)  Signs shall be located on private property only with the permission of the property owner. 
(f)  Signs shall not be located on City property. 
(g)  Signs shall be located at least one (1) foot from the City right-of-way. 
(h)  Can be displayed for three (3) periods per calendar year, each period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. 
(i)  A permit must be obtained prior to the placement of any signs. A map showing the approximate location of the placement of the signs shall be included with the permit. There will be no fee for the permit. 
(2)  Contractor signs. 
(a)  One sign permitted per lot. 
(b)  Sign shall be placed upon the lot in which the work is being done. 
(c)  Maximum size of four (4) square feet in size for residential properties and maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet in size is permitted for commercial properties. 
(d)  Maximum sign height is five (5') feet. 
(e)  The sign cannot be placed on the property prior to the work commencing and must be removed within fifteen (15) days of the work being complete. 
(f)  Must be located at least one (1) foot from the City right-of-way. 
(g)  No permit or fee is required for signs four (4) square feet and under. 
(h)  Permit shall be obtained and the fee paid prior to the placement of any signs over four (4) square feet. 
(3)  Window signs-Non-residential. 
(a)  The total amount of all window signs (including but not limited to permanent, temporary, political and community signs) shall not cover more than a total of twenty-five percent (25%) of the aggregate square footage of all windows for that business. Windows in doors that are intended to be used for patronage entrance shall be included in the calculation of window area. 
Windows in all doors that are not used nor intended to be used for patronage entrance, including but not limited to, bay doors, dock doors, delivery doors and rear entrance doors, are excluded in the calculation of window area and temporary window signs are not permitted thereon. 
(b)  Windows made with spandrel glass (or similar non-vision material) are excluded in the calculation of aggregate window area. Temporary window signs shall not be permitted on such window type. 
(c)  Temporary window signs shall only be used to display specials, promotional offers, political, information and/or community events. 
(d)  Temporary window signs shall not include the name, phone number, website or email address of another business. 
(e)  Temporary window signs shall only be placed in first floor windows unless the use is located solely in the second or higher stories of the building. 
(f)  Temporary window signs shall be erected for a period not to exceed 90 days each. The date upon which a temporary window sign is first displayed shall be legibly (from the street or parking lot drive isle, whichever is closer to the building) marked on the sign. Once the 90 days has been reached that signage shall be removed and not reinstalled for 60 days. 
(g)  A one-time permit shall be obtained indicating the total aggregate square footage of all applicable windows for that business and indicating the total amount of permanent window signage. There will be no fee for the permit. The City reserves the right to verify any and all information provided on the permit. Any change in the window configuration shall require a new permit. 
(4)  Yard Sale/Garage Sale signs. 
(a)  Permitted in Residential districts (R-1 - R-5) or Residential properties only. 
(b)  Maximum size of four (4) square feet per sign. 
(c)  One sale sign may be placed on the property where the sale is to be conducted and on other additional private properties with permission of the property owners. 
(d)  In no case shall the signs be placed on public property including but not limited to city parks, rights-of-way, street signs (including stop signs) or utility poles. 
(e)  Signs may be displayed two (2) days prior to the sale and during the event and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the event. 
(f)  Signs shall clearly state the specific date(s) of the sale and the address. in which the sale is occurring. 
(g)  Signs for sales outside of the City of Marysville corporation limits are prohibited. 
(h)  No permit or- fee is required. 
(i)  Any signs placed in violation of this section will be confiscated by the City of Marysville. 
(5)  Vehicular signs. 
(a)  Signs shall be permanently or magnetically attached to a business or commercial vehicle. They shall not be temporarily painted on or otherwise attached to a vehicle. 
(b)  Vehicles with approved signage shall not be. primarily or consistently parked in front of a business or on their property so as to function as an on- or off-premise sign. 
(c)  Signs shall not be used to advertise specials or promotional events. 
(d)  Vehicles shall be legally parked in a designated parking space. 
(e)  No permit or fee is required. 
(6)  Festival/Special Event signs. 
(a)  Events that have received a permit from the City of Marysville are permitted to have one sign per vehicular or pedestrian entrance. These entrances must be identified and submitted with the permit request and shall be subject to approval. 
(b)  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
(c)  Maximum sign height shall be four (4) feet. 
(d)  Signs shall only be displayed on the day of the event. 
(e)  A permit shall be obtained for each period before the displaying of such sign. There will be no fee for the permit. 
(7)  Painted Holiday Window Murals. 
(a)  Holiday murals, scenes, or decorations painted on windows of a business may be displayed for an total period not to exceed 45 days per calendar year. 
(b)  The mural shall not include references to particular products, services, sales, or events. 
(c)  No permit or fee is required. 
(8)  Light Pole Banners. 
(a)  Prohibited except when used in the Uptown area for public events and seasonal decorations. 
(b)  Banners shall not contain the name or other information of any business. 
(c)  Banners shall only be erected and removed by City personnel. 
(d)  A permit for all banners shall be submitted and approved by the Director of Administration or his or her designated representative before being displayed. There will be no fee for the permit. 
(9)  Seasonal Business signage. 
(a)  Seasonal Businesses that have received a permit from the City of Marysville are permitted to have one (1) sign attached to the cart/stand or one (1) sign that is not attached in which the farthest point of a non-attached sign shall be no more than three (3) feet from the cart/stand. 
(b)  Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
(c)  Maximum sign height shall be four (4) feet when placed on the ground or eight (8) feet if it is attached to the cart/stand. 
(d)  Sign shall only be displayed during sale times. 
(e)  Sign shall be at least one (1) foot from the City right-of-way. 
(f)  Permit shall be obtained and the fee paid prior to the placement of any sign. 
(10)  Public or Quasi-Public signage. 
(a)  Can display a maximum of 25 signs Citywide, including banners (see below). 
(b)  Maximum height of any freestanding (not attached to a building or any other structure) sign is five (5) feet. 
(c)  Maximum size is twenty (20) square feet, not to exceed ten (10) feet in length. 
(d)  Free standing signs shall be located at least one (1) foot from the right-of-way. 
(e)  Signs shall not be located on City property. 
(f)  One sign is permitted per street frontage. In no case shall the number of signs exceed two per property. 
(g)  Shall not include advertising, phone number, website, or e-mail address of/for another business. For sign sponsors, see Section 1143.09 (1). 
(h)  If it is a banner type sign, it shall:. 
i.  Be attached at each comer, point and/or end so as to prevent movement. 
ii.  If it is located on a building, the banner shall not be placed any higher than fifteen (15) feet or any lower than ten (10) feet from the ground, unless unusual circumstances exist and an alternative is approved by the Zoning Inspector. 
iii.  The total number of banners for any one event shall not exceed six (6) Citywide. This number shall be included in the total number of signs permitted. 
(i)  Shall not cover, in whole or in part, any existing sign. It shall also not be attached vertically to any existing structure as to exceed the allowable sign height for that type of sign or zoning district. 
(j)  Shall not be attached to or displayed on a vehicle. 
(k)  Signs shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days before the date of the event and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after the event is over. If the sign is informational only and no specific date is involved, the sign is permitted to be displayed for a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
(l)  Signs can be displayed up to six (6) times per year per entity I organization. 
(m)  Permits: 
i.  A permit shall be obtained before the displaying of such signs. 
ii.  Up to six (6) display periods can be handled on one permit. 
iii.  A map showing the approximate location of the placement of the signs shall be included with the permit. 
iv.  There will be no fee for the permit. 
(11)  Educational/Public Service Light Pole Banner. 
(a)  For Public and Quasi-Public uses and eligible users, an Educational/Public Service banner may be installed on light poles per the following requirements: 
i.  Shall be designed as an education or public service announcement to recognize school events, community interest and promotes good health and safety. Examples include: Heart Awareness Month, National Reading Month Monarch School Spirit, Buckle-Up and Happy 200 th Birthday Marysville. 
ii.  If the user is eligible for directional light pole banners/signs, the user may also install Educational/Public Service banners if: 
a.  The banner is located on the same light pole as the directional banner/sign. 
b.  The banner is the same size and shape as the complementary directional banner/sign. 
iii.  Shall not contain logos, advertisements, or any information to affiliates of any business or services offered at other locations. 
iv.  If the banner is being used to announce a specific event that is being held on a specific date and time, the banner shall not be installed any more than thirty (30) days prior to the event and removed within seventy-two (72) hours after the event is over. For all other purposes, it is encouraged that banners are rotated every 90 days so users can maximize their potential. 
(b)  For each Educational/Public service parking lot light pole banner: 
i.  The banner shall be located on light poles located on private property. Light poles within a public right-of-way are prohibited from use (i.e., streets and alleyways.) 
ii.  No additional lighting (internal or external) shall be installed for any banner. 
iii.  One pole banner is permitted per public building entrance and they shall be spaced at least forty (40) feet apart. 
iv.  Shall not exceed a maximum of eight (8) square feet. 
v.  Minimum vertical height shall be twelve (12) feet from the ground. 
vi.  Each banner shall not extend any further than four (4) feet from the primary pole for which the banner and/or banner structure is attached to. 
vii.  Banner supports/brackets shall complement the style and color of the light pole. 
viii.  A permit for all banner shall be submitted and approved by the Design Review Board before being displayed. Review will include the location of banners as well as final design for each banner. There will be no fee for the Board Review or the permit. 
(c)  Maintenance for banners. The following circumstances violate this subsection and require immediate action: 
i.  Perimeter is frayed. 
ii.  Fabric is ripped or tom. 
iii.  Stitching is lose. 
iv.  Fabric is faded. 
v.  Banner is partially disconnected from its supports. 
vi.  Frame or supports are rusted, bent or damaged. 
(12)  Grand Opening Sign. 
(a)  Shall not exceed 20 sq. ft. in size. 
(b)  Can be displayed for a length of time not to exceed fifteen (15) days after the official opening of the use. 
(c)  If the use has a "Coming Soon" sign, the "Grand Opening" sign shall not be installed until "Coming Soon" is removed from the property. 
(d)  A permit shall be obtained before the displaying of such sign. No permit fee is required. 
(13)  Coming Soon Sign. 
(a)  Shall not exceed 20 sq. ft. in size. 
(b)  Can be displayed for a length not to exceed ninety (90) days prior to the grand opening of the use. 
(c)  Shall be removed prior to the installation of a "Grand Opening" sign. 
(d)  A permit shall be obtained before the displaying of such sign. No permit fee is required. 
(14)  Banners. 
(a)  One banner is permitted per building or if there are multiple businesses in a building, one banner is permitted per building unit with an exterior wall. 
(b)  Maximum of twenty (20) square feet is permitted and it shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length. 
(c)  The banner shall be displayed on the property for which the banner is advertising. 
(d)  Can be displayed for six (6) periods per calendar year, each period not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(e)  Can be used to display special events or promotional offers. 
(f)  Shall not include the name, phone number, website or e-mail address of another business. 
(g)  Shall be attached at each comer, point and/or end so as to restrict movement. 
(h)  Shall not be attached to or on top of another sign. 
(i)  Shall not be attached to or displayed on a vehicle. 
(j)  Banners shall be displayed at least two (2) feet from the City right-of-way. Where the building setback is zero (0) feet, the banner shall be secured flush against the building. 
(k)  When attached to a building the banner shall not be placed any higher than fifteen (15) feet or any lower than ten (10) feet from the ground, unless unusual circumstances exist and an alternative is approved. When the banner is freestanding, the maximum height is five (5) feet. 
(l)  A permit shall be obtained for each period before the displaying of such banner. There shall be no permit fee for non-profits. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 17-14. Passed 4-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.091. - Portable sidewalk signs. 
The purpose of a portable sidewalk sign is to inform pedestrians of daily specials or sales that may be occurring within a business. 
(A)  General Requirements: 
(1)  Sign shall not be illuminated. 
(2)  Sign structure shall not be designed in such a way that the structure moves or sways in its environment. 
(3)  Sign shall not have balloons, streamers, pennants, or similar adornment attached to it. 
(4)  Sign shall not be attached to structures, poles, objects, signs, etc., by means of chains, cords, ropes, wire, cable, etc. 
(5)  Sign shall not lean or rest against a structure. 
(6)  The entire sidewalk area in front of the building where the sign is to be placed shall be clear of debris including leaves, snow, ice, etc. prior to placing the sign out for the day. 
(7)  The sign must be able to withstand wind and inclement weather without the aid of additional weighted materials that are not part of the original sign structure. 
(8)  The sign shall only be displayed during business operating hours. 
(9)  Changeable copy is prohibited. 
(B)  Sign Area: Maximum 6 square feet per panel of which a maximum of 4-112 square feet per panel may be of a synthetic material. 
(C)  Sign Height: Maximum ( 48) inches; minimum (36) inches. 
(D)  Sign Width: Maximum (24) inches; maximum (26) inches if sign panel is framed. 
(E)  Permitted sign materials and colors: 
(1)  Sign structure/framing: steel, iron, metal, finished wood and/or a synthetic material that has the appearance of steel, iron, metal and/or finished wood. 
(2)  Synthetic structure/framing colors: dark browns, greens, reds, blues, black and white. 
(3)  Sign panel: synthetic materials such as chalkboard and whiteboard. 
(F)  Number: One per business. 
(G)  Location: The furthest edge of the sign structure shall not be placed more than (5) feet from the public entrance and shall not be placed more than (3) feet away from the building. Sign shall not be located in a manner that prevents access to the building or impedes pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. 
(H)  Maintenance: Portable sidewalk signs shall be maintained in good repair and design and shall be free of splinters, slivers, sharp projections, sharp edges, peeling and/or flaking paint. 
(I)  Permit Required: A sign permit is required prior to the placement of a portable sidewalk sign. Only one permit for a portable sidewalk sign is allowed per business and such permit is not transferable. Permits are valid for one calendar year beginning January 1 and ending on December 31. A sign may be located within the public right-of-way if the business setback is less than 3 feet and if the business and property owner sign a hold harmless agreement alleviating the City of any liability for the use of said public right-of-way. 
(J)  Submittal Requirements: A drawing including the dimensions, materials, colors, and location of the sign shall be attached to the permit application. The permit application must be approved by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative and required fee paid per Chapter 1100 of this Planning and Zoning Code, prior to the sign being displayed. If the sign is displayed prior to obtaining an approved sign permit, the application may be denied. 
(K)  Violations: Portable sidewalk signs placed in violation of this section will result in immediate removal of the sign and the business's portable sidewalk sign permit privileges shall be revoked for one year from the date of the violations. Signs displayed without approved permits shall be disposed of at the owner's expense. 
(L)  Removal: Portable sidewalk signs within the public right-of-way may be moved/removed by the City for municipal purposes (i.e., traffic issues, emergencies, maintenance, etc.) 
(Ord. 55-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.10. - Political signs. 
(A)  The City of Marysville prefers that political signs regarding candidates or issues that will appear on the ballot, not be posted more than 10 days from the first date of absentee voting as carried out by the Union County Board of Elections. 
(B)  Permission to post political signs must be obtained from the property owner(s). Political signs shall not be posted on City-owned property. 
(C)  Political signs shall be located at least one foot from the street right-of-way. 
(D)  Candidates for election or organizations putting issues on the ballot shall be held responsible for the posting of political signs and shall remove such signs no later than five days after the election. 
(E)  Political signs shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard. 
(F)  The size of political signs in residentially zoned districts (AR, ER, SR, OR, BR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5) shall be no more than ten square feet. Political signs in other districts shall be no more than thirty-two square feet except for commercial billboards. 
(G)  The Zoning Inspector and/or agent(s) will remove signs that are posted in violation of this section. Within two business days of the removal of the sign(s), the Zoning Inspector and/or agent(s) will notify the responsible party, who will have 48 hours after receiving said notice to pick up the sign(s). After such time, the sign(s) will be destroyed. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.11. - Applications for permits. 
Applications for permits to erect, place, move or alter a sign shall be made by the owner or lessee of the property for which a sign is proposed. The application shall be submitted to the Zoning Inspector on forms furnished by the City. The fee shall be established by separate ordinance. The permit fee shall be waived in the case of a sign alteration or replacement in order to bring a legal nonconforming sign into conformance with the regulations of this chapter. 
(A)  Permit Required. All permanent and temporary signs shall be subject to the applicable regulations regarding permitted types, number, area, height and location. Permits shall be required for all permanent and temporary signs with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Nameplates. 
(2)  Real estate, house sale, and open house signs less than six square feet in area. 
(3)  Political signs. 
(4)  Normal maintenance or repainting which does not alter the size, placement or structure of a legal conforming sign (legal nonconforming signs see Section 1143.13). 
(5)  Signs as stated in Section 1143.08(A). 
(B)  Contents of Application. Each application shall present the information required below through use of photographs and drawings at a scale which clearly shows details and design of the sign. 
(1)  The design and layout of each sign proposed, including the total area of all signs and the area, height, character, materials, colors and type of lettering or other symbols of individual signs. 
(2)  Photographs or drawings of the building for which the signs are proposed and photographs of surrounding buildings, signs and uses. Also included shall be the width of the building or building unit face or faces and the lot dimensions. 
(3)  The proposed illumination shall be described. 
(4)  A site plan showing the location of each sign in relation to the building and property. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011; Ord. 34-12. Passed 6-28-2012.) 
Sec. 1143.12. - Maintenance and removal of signs. 
(A)  All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in a safe and attractive condition. Signs which no longer serve the purpose for which they were intended or which have been abandoned or are not maintained in accordance with this Zoning Code or other governmental agency with competent jurisdiction shall be removed by the last permit holder or the building owner or by the City at the expense of such permit holder or building owner. 
(B)  Whenever the removal or maintenance of any permanent sign has been ordered by the Zoning Inspector and the person, firm or corporation who owns such sign or on whose premises such sign or display structure has been erected, affixed or attached, fails to remove or maintain the sign within thirty days after receiving such notice, the Zoning Inspector may remove or cause to be removed or maintain such sign at the expense of the person, firm or corporation who owns such sign, or on whose premises it was erected, affixed or attached and each such person, firm or corporation shall be individually and separately liable for the expenses incurred in the removal of such sign. Prohibited and/or temporary signs shall be removed within five days after a removal order is received from the Zoning Inspector. The Board of Zoning Appeals may vary the thirty day period contained in this section. 
(C)  If, in the opinion of the Zoning Inspector or other inspector qualified to make such a determination, a sign is so hazardous as to constitute an immediate danger to life, the Zoning Inspector shall promptly cause the repair or removal of the sign at the expense of the person, firm or corporation who owns such sign or the owner on whose premises the sign was erected, affixed or attached. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.13. - Nonconforming signs. 
Signs and sign structures in existence prior to or on the effective date of this chapter which violate or otherwise do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and which were erected in accordance with a City permit shall be deemed legal nonconforming signs. All such legal nonconforming signs and structures shall be maintained in accordance with this sign chapter. 
(A)  Loss of Nonconforming Status. It is the intent of this section that legal nonconforming signs eventually be brought into compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. As a result a legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status and therefore must be brought into conformance with this chapter or be removed if the sign is enlarged, relocated or replaced; or if it is part of an establishment which discontinues operation for thirty consecutive days; or if it is structurally damaged to an extent greater than one-half of its estimated replacement value. Similarly any legal nonconforming advertising structure so damaged must be brought into compliance or be removed. 
(B)  Maintenance and Repair. Any legal nonconforming sign may be painted, cleaned or maintained and structural or electrical parts may be repaired or restored to a safe condition provided the maintenance or repair does not alter, change, enlarge or relocate the existing sign or sign structures. 
(C)  Limitation on Reconstruction. A nonconforming sign or part thereof damaged or deteriorated to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost shall not be reconstructed or replaced unless made to conform to the regulations of this Code. For a nonconforming sign damaged by a single incident (such as a storm) to an extent less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost, reconstruction is permitted only if such work is begun within six months of the incident and is completed within twelve months of the incident. 
(D)  Temporary Signs. All nonconforming temporary signs including portable signs shall be removed or made to comply with the regulations of this Code within five days after issuance of a violation by the City. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.14. - Supplemental regulations. 
(A)  Shopping Centers. For purposes of this chapter, five or more businesses located on a single lot and served by common parking or common vehicular entrances shall be classified as a "shopping center" and shall be permitted one free-standing identification sign in addition to other permitted signs in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Contents. Each shopping center identification sign shall display only the name of the center and may at the discretion of the shopping center owner list the names of businesses located within the center. 
(2)  Size. The maximum sign face area of a shopping center identification sign shall equal twenty square feet for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area but shall not exceed 100 square feet. All shopping centers however shall be permitted a sign of at least thirty-two square feet. A maximum height of twenty-five feet shall be permitted. 
(3)  Other regulations. All other regulations of this chapter applicable to identification signs shall apply to a shopping center identification sign. 
(4)  Other sign. A lot displaying a shopping center identification sign may display no other free-standing identification or business sign. 
(5)  Secondary frontage. One additional shopping center identification free-standing sign and one additional shopping center identification wall sign shall be permitted on a secondary street frontage with a vehicular entrance to the shopping center. 
(6)  Outlets. If a vehicular entrance or parking lot of a shopping center also serves a use located on a separate lot (i.e., "outlet") the free-standing identification or business sign permitted for such lot shall be limited to a maximum of twenty square feet in area and five feet in height. 
(B)  Advertising. Permanent business signs or portions of permanent business signs devoted to the advertising of brand names of specific products or services which are not the principal products or services of the occupant of the building unit shall be limited to twenty percent (20%) of the maximum sign face area permitted in total for the building or unit thereof. 
(C)  Non-Exterior Direct Access. For uses not located on the ground floor and for ground floor uses which lack direct access from the building exterior, the following signs shall be permitted in addition to signs otherwise permitted for the building. Regardless of the number of such uses in a building, not more than one wall sign, a maximum of six square feet in area, may be placed at each ground floor entrance providing access to the uses in question. In addition, for each such use, window signs not exceeding twenty square feet in total area shall be permitted for display on the inside surface of windows within the subject area. 
(D)  Rear or Side Entrance. In addition to signs and sign face area otherwise permitted each building or building unit shall be entitled to one wall, window or canopy identification sign not exceeding six square feet in area that is located at a rear or side entrance as designated by the business owner or proprietor. 
(E)  Drive-Thru Restaurants. For restaurants providing direct service to customers in motor vehicles one free-standing or wall-mounted menu board sign (limited to information regarding the restaurant's menu and related instructions) shall be permitted for each drive-thru lane in addition to signs and sign area otherwise permitted. Such sign shall not exceed forty square feet in area and six feet in height and shall meet setback regulations applicable to free-standing identification signs as specified in this section. 
(F)  Gasoline Service Stations. Gasoline service stations shall conform to the sign regulations applicable to the district in which each is located except as permitted below. 
(1)  Gasoline service stations shall be permitted one free-standing permanent identification sign and one free-standing permanent business sign one of which identifies the name of the business or principal brand of gasoline and the other advertising the price of fuel by type or grade. No other information may be displayed on the free-standing identification or business signs. 
(2)  For signs displaying the price of fuel the numerals on such sign shall not exceed two feet in height. 
(G)  Theaters. The following regulations shall apply to indoor and outdoor movie theaters which require (as determined by the Zoning Inspector) signs announcing shows or performances. Two poster-sized frames (copy to be changed) per theater screen for current and coming attractions. Total area cannot exceed forty percent (40%) of total permitted sign area. Indoor theaters are permitted canopy marquee signs announcing current or future attractions at a size not to exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the fascia of each side of the canopy marquee. All other regulations of this chapter shall apply to theaters. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.15. - Variances. 
(A)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may in specific cases vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter if it finds that such variation or exception will not violate the spirit or intent of this chapter and is in accordance with the general criteria for the granting of variances as stated in Chapter 1129 except in the following instances: 
(1)  Variances with regard to the type of sign may not be granted in Zoning Districts ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5. 
(2)  The Design Review Board may in specific cases vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter within the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District instead of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The granting of variances shall follow the general criteria and procedures as stated in Chapter 1129 and as supplemented by Chapter 1136. 
(B)  Application for variances shall follow the procedures outlined in Chapter 1129. When reviewing an application for a variance the Board of Zoning Appeals or Design Review Board as defined above shall consider at least the following in addition to the standards set forth in Chapter 1129: 
(1)  Zoning district of the proposed sign(s). 
(2)  Use type, structural type, area, height and location of the proposed sign(s). 
(3)  Visibility of proposed sign with respect to pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Illumination of the sign(s). 
(5)  Design of the sign(s). 
(6)  Unusual natural or man-made physical and/or topographic characteristics peculiar to site. 
(7)  The intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.16. - Signs in ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and GOV Zoning Districts. 
(A)  Nameplates. Nameplates in ER, SR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts and single family uses in R-4: 
(1)  Free-standing wall or projecting. 
(2)  Two per dwelling unit. 
(3)  Two square feet maximum each. 
(4)  Five feet minimum from any lot or right-of-way line. 
(5)  Five feet maximum from the building line. 
(B)  Identification Signs. Identification signs for subdivisions and/or multi-family: 
(1)  Free-standing wall or canopy/awning. 
(2)  One sign (additional free-standing sign shall be permitted at each vehicular entrance if minimum distance between any two such signs is at least 500 feet apart.) 
(3)  Twenty square feet. 
(4)  Five feet in height maximum. 
(5)  Fifteen feet minimum from any lot or right-of-way line. 
(6)  Twenty-five feet minimum from any dwelling. 
(C)  Identification Signs. Identification signs for public or quasi-public uses: 
(1)  Free-standing, wall or canopy/awning. 
(2)  One sign. 
(3)  Forty square feet. 
(4)  Five feet in height maximum. 
(5)  Fifteen feet minimum from any lot or right-of-way line. 
(6)  Twenty-five feet from any dwelling. 
(D)  Information Window/Wall Signs (GOV zoning only). 
(1)  Combined total of three square feet maximum. 
(E)  Directional Signs. Directional signs (on premises) not permitted for 1-4 unit residential buildings: 
(1)  Free-standing or wall. 
(2)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(3)  Two square feet maximum. 
(4)  Free-standing: three feet in height maximum. 
(5)  Free-standing: Five feet minimum from any lot line, except one foot minimum from any right-of-way line. 
(F)  Real Estate Signs, Model Home and Sold Signs. Real estate, model home signs and sold signs permitted on-premise for individual lots or building until they are sold or rented: 
(1)  Free-standing, wall or window. 
(2)  One per street frontage for individual buildings and lots. 
(3)  Six square feet maximum. 
(4)  Four feet in height maximum. 
(5)  At least one foot from street right-of-way. 
(6)  At least five feet from side or rear lot lines. 
(7)  Sold signs shall be removed within five calendar days from closing. 
(G)  Real Estate Signs and Sold Signs. Real estate signs and sold signs for subdivisions permitted until all lots or buildings are sold or rented: 
(1)  Free-standing, wall or window. 
(2)  One per frontage on each perimeter street. 
(3)  Forty square feet maximum. 
(4)  Eight feet in height maximum. 
(5)  Twenty feet minimum from any lot or right-of-way line and seventy-five feet from any occupied dwelling. 
(H)  Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards for public or quasi-public uses: 
(1)  Free-standing or wall. 
(2)  One per public or quasi-public use. 
(3)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(4)  Five feet in height maximum. 
(5)  Twenty feet minimum from any lot line. 
(Ord. 34-12. Passed 6-28-2012; Ord. 28-13. Passed 6-27-2013; Ord. 54-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.17. - Signs in AR, BR, and OR Zoning Districts. 
(A)  If located within the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District all signs shall conform to the color and material standards of Chapter 1136; applicant must obtain certificate of appropriateness for all signs. 
(B)  For residential and public and quasi-public uses located in business districts the regulations of Section 1143.16 shall apply. For each building unit not more than one identification sign shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign or a window sign unless restricted or not permitted in subsection (E) hereof. It is the intent of this section to prohibit freestanding identification signs on lots with street frontage insufficient to provide the required minimum distance from lot lines. The exterior style, size, scale, lighting and selection of materials for the sign shall be such that the proposed sign complements the immediate and surrounding neighborhoods. The Design Review Board shall review and approve proposed plans for all signage to be constructed in conjunction with a new structure, including 3-dimensional renderings. 
(C)  Two business signs per unit permitted. Each business sign cannot be more than twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area per sign. Business signs shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign or a window sign. 
(D)  Wall and canopy signs shall not extend above the wall or surface to which they are attached. Wall signs shall be set back from the ends of the building and party wall lines a minimum distance of three feet. 
(E)  Maximum total sign face area of all permanent signs (excluding information signs and open and closed signs, which are exempt from this calculation) shall be related to the width of the building or building unit. Maximum total permanent sign face area shall not exceed 300 square feet and shall be determined as follows: 
Frontage width of building  1. 8 if building setback is less than 50 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2 if building setback is 50 to 300 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2.2 if building setback is 301 to 600 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2.4 if building setback is over 600 feet. 
(1)  Free-standing identification signs. 
(a)  One per business*. 
(b)  Twelve square feet maximum. 
(c)  Five feet in height maximum. 
* More than two business units in a single building are not permitted a free-standing identification sign for each business unit. A single free-standing identification sign shall be permitted the size of which shall be: 
(d)  Twelve square feet for the first business unit. 
(e)  Eight square feet for each additional business unit to a maximum of seventy-two square feet. 
(f)  Nine feet in height maximum for four businesses or more. 
(g)  Twenty feet side and rear lot lines. 
(2)  Wall/window identification signs. 
(a)  One either wall or window. 
(b)  Width of building unit  1.2 for wall. 
(c)  Twenty-five percent (25%) window area for window. 
(3)  Canopy identification signs. 
(a)  Can be displayed as soffit sign only. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum. 
(4)  Projecting identification signs. Not permitted. 
(5)  Free-standing business signs. Not permitted. 
(6)  Wall and/or window business signs. 
(a)  Two per business. 
i.  Cannot exceed twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area. 
ii.  Twenty-five percent (25%) of window area for window signs. 
(7)  Canopy business signs. Not permitted. 
(8)  Projecting business signs. Not permitted. 
(9)  Free-standing directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
ii.  Three feet in height maximum. 
iii.  Ten feet from residential district line. 
iv.  One foot from street right-of-way line. 
v.  Five feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(10)  Wall directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(11)  Window directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(12)  Canopy directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(13)  Projecting directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(14)  Free-standing real estate and model home signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum. 
(c)  Four feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Twenty feet from residential district line. 
(e)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(f)  Twenty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(g)  Sold signs shall be removed within five calendar days from closing. 
(15)  Wall or window real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(c)  Maximum- no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of window area. 
(16)  Canopy real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(17)  Projecting real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(18)  Temporary signs. 
(a)  Shall be in conformance with Section 1143.09. 
(19)  Temporary canopy signs. Not permitted. 
(20)  Temporary projecting signs. Not permitted. 
(21)  Portable sidewalk signs. Permitted (see Section 1143.091 for regulations) 
(22)  Information window/wall signs. 
(a)  Combined total of three square feet maximum. 
(23)  Open/closed signs. 
(a)  Three square feet maximum. 
(Ord. 53-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.171. - Signs in HMD Zoning District. 
(A)  For residential and public and quasi-public uses located in business districts the regulations of Section 1143.16 shall apply. For each building unit not more than one identification sign shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign or a window sign unless restricted or not permitted in subsection (D) hereof. It is the intent of this section to prohibit freestanding identification signs on lots with street frontage insufficient to provide the required minimum distance from lot lines. The exterior style, size, scale, lighting and selection of materials for the sign shall be such that the proposed sign complements the immediate and surrounding neighborhoods. The Design Review Board shall review and approve proposed plans for all signage to be constructed in conjunction with a new structure, including 3-dimensional renderings. 
(B)  Two business signs per unit permitted. Each business sign cannot be more than twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area per sign. Business signs shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign or a window sign. 
(C)  Wall and canopy signs shall not extend above the wall or surface to which they are attached. Wall signs shall be set back from the ends of the building and party wall lines a minimum distance of three feet. 
(D)  Maximum total sign face area of all permanent signs (excluding information signs and open and closed signs, which are exempt from this calculation) shall be related to the width of the building or building unit. Maximum total permanent sign face area shall not exceed 300 square feet and shall be determined as follows: 
Frontage width of building  1.8 if building setback is less than 50 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2 if building setback is 50 to 300 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2.2 if building setback is 301 to 600 feet. 
Frontage width of building  2.4 if building setback is over 600 feet. 
(1)  Free-standing identification signs. 
(a)  One per business*. 
(b)  Twelve square feet maximum. 
(c)  Five feet in height maximum. 
* More than two business units in a single building are not permitted a free-standing identification sign for each business unit. A single free-standing identification sign shall be permitted the size of which shall be: 
(d)  Twelve square feet for the first business unit. 
(e)  Eight square feet for each additional business unit to a maximum of seventy-two square feet. 
(f)  Nine feet in height maximum for four businesses or more. 
(g)  Twenty feet side and rear lot lines. 
(2)  Wall/window identification signs. 
(a)  One either wall or window. 
(b)  Width of building unit  1.2 for wall. 
(c)  Twenty-five percent (25%) window area for window. 
(3)  Canopy identification signs. 
(a)  Can be displayed as soffit sign only. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum. 
(4)  Projecting identification signs. Not permitted. 
(5)  Free-standing business signs. Not permitted. 
(6)  Wall and/or window business signs. 
(a)  Two per business. 
i.  Cannot exceed twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area. 
ii.  Twenty-five percent (25%) of window area for window signs. 
(7)  Canopy business signs. Not permitted. 
(8)  Projecting business signs. Not permitted. 
(9)  Free-standing directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
ii.  Three feet in height maximum. 
iii.  Ten feet from residential district line. 
iv.  One foot from street right-of-way line. 
v.  Five feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(10)  Wall directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(11)  Window directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(12)  Canopy directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(13)  Projecting directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(14)  Directional sign (parking lot light pole banner/sign). 
(a)  Shall be used for parking lot or building identification only. 
i.  The Design Review Board shall approve the location and design of the directional light pole banner/sign. 
ii.  Shall be placed in parking lots that serve a Hospital. 
iii.  One pole banner/sign is permitted per public building entrance and one additional pole banner/sign is permitted for each 75 off-street parking spaces and they shall be spaced at least 40 feet apart. 
iv.  Shall not exceed a maximum of 8 square feet. 
v.  Banners/signs shall have only required information for location of entrance such as: 
a.  Letter or Number to signify the entrance (i.e., "A"). 
b.  Description of the entrance or service (i.e., Emergency Entrance). 
c.  Other information that is required as determined by the Design Review Board to clarify the direction, parking and entrance to the building. 
(b)  For each directional parking lot light pole banner/sign: 
i.  The name of the Hospital and recognized affiliates shall be limited to 10 percent (10%) of the total sign area for each banner/sign. 
ii.  No additional lighting (internal or external) shall be installed for any banner/sign. 
iii.  Each banner/sign shall not extend any further than 4 feet from the primary pole for which the banner/sign and/or banner/sign structure is attached to. 
iv.  Minimal vertical height clearance each banner/sign shall be no less than 12 feet. 
(15)  Information window/wall signs. 
(a)  Combined total of three square feet maximum. 
(16)  Open/closed signs. 
(a)  Three square feet maximum. 
(Ord. 46-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.18. - Signs in B-1, TOC and SD-1 Zoning Districts. 
(A)  For each building unit, not more than one identification sign shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign, a window sign, or a free-standing sign, unless restricted in subsection (D)(1)-(24) hereof. It is the intent of this section to prohibit free-standing identification signs on lots with street frontage insufficient to provide the required minimum distance from lot lines. If frontage is less than sixty feet, free-standing identification signs are not permitted. The exterior style, size, scale, lighting and selection of materials for the sign shall be such that the proposed sign complements the immediate and surrounding neighborhoods. The Planning Commission shall review and approve proposed plans for all signage to be constructed in conjunction with a new structure, including 3-Dimensional renderings. 
(B)  Two business signs per unit permitted. Each business sign cannot be more than twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area per sign. Business signs shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign, or a window sign, unless restricted in subsection (D)(1)-(24) hereof. 
(C)  Wall and canopy signs shall not extend above the wall or surface to which they are attached. Wall signs shall be set back from the ends of the building and party wall lines a minimum distance of three feet. 
(D)  Maximum total sign face area of all permanent signs (excluding information signs and open and closed signs, which are exempt from this calculation) shall be related to the width of the building or building unit. Maximum total permanent sign face area shall not exceed 300 square feet and shall be determined as follows: 
Frontage width of building  1.8 if building setback is less than 50 feet as measured from the right-of-way; 
Frontage width of building  2 if building setback is 50 to 300 feet as measured from the right-of-way; 
Frontage width of building  2.2 if building setback is 301 to 600 feet as measured from the right-of-way; 
Frontage width of building  2.4 if building setback is over 600 feet as measured from the right-of-way. 
(1)  Free-standing identification signs. Free-standing identification signs if lot frontage is at least sixty feet but less than eighty feet in width: 
(a)  One per business unit. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum sign face area. 
(c)  Five feet height maximum. 
(d)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(e)  Thirty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(2)  Free-standing identification signs. Free-standing identification signs if lot frontage is at least eighty feet but less than 125 feet in width: 
(a)  One per lot. 
(b)  Fifty square feet maximum. 
(c)  Twenty feet in height maximum. 
(d)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(e)  Forty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(3)  Free-standing identification signs. Free-standing identification signs if lot frontage is at least 125 feet in width: 
(a)  One per lot or vehicular entrance per Section 1143.05(A)(2). 
(b)  Seventy-two square feet maximum. 
(c)  Twenty-five feet in height maximum. 
(d)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(e)  Sixty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(4)  Wall identification signs. 
(a)  One per business unit. 
(b)  Maximum sign face area - width of building  1.2 (subject to maximum limitations as calculated in this subsection). 
(5)  Window identification signs. 
(a)  One per business unit. 
(b)  Maximum sign face area not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of total window glass area (excluding door windows). 
(6)  Canopy identification signs. 
(a)  One per business unit. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum for soffit. 
(c)  Thirty-two square feet maximum for fascia. 
(7)  Projecting identification signs. Not permitted. 
(8)  Free-standing business signs. 
(a)  One per business unit only if the business sign is a changeable copy sign and the changeable copy sign is attached to the same structure and in addition to a free-standing identification sign. 
(b)  Maximum size - twenty-five percent (25%) of the permitted free-standing identification sign face area. This area is included within maximum sign face area and is not in addition to sign face area. 
(9)  Wall and/or window business signs. *Theaters only. 
(a)  Two per business unit. 
(b)  Each sign cannot exceed twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area. 
* Two per theater screen for current and coming attractions - total area not to exceed forty percent (40%) of total sign area. 
(10)  Canopy business signs. Not permitted.* 
* Except for indoor theaters which shall be permitted canopy marquee signs announcing current or future attractions at a size not to exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the fascia of each side of the canopy or marquee. 
(11)  Projecting signs. Not permitted. 
(12)  Free-standing directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
ii.  Three feet in height maximum. 
iii.  Ten feet from residential district line. 
iv.  One foot from street right-of-way. 
v.  Five feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(13)  Wall directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Six square feet maximum. 
(14)  Window directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Six square feet maximum. 
(15)  Canopy directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(16)  Projecting directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Four square feet maximum. 
(17)  Free-standing real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Thirty-two square feet maximum. 
(c)  Eight feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Twenty feet from residential district line. 
(e)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(18)  Wall or window real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(c)  No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of window area. 
(19)  Canopy real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(20)  Projecting real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(21)  Temporary free-standing signs. Shall be in conformance with Section 1143.09. 
(22)  Temporary canopy signs. Not permitted. 
(23)  Temporary projecting signs. Not permitted. 
(24)  Portable sidewalk signs. Permitted (see Section 1143.091 for regulations) 
(25)  Information window/wall signs. 
(a)  Combined total of three square feet maximum. 
(26)  Open/closed signs. 
(a)  Three square feet maximum. 
(E)  Commercial Parks. In addition to signs otherwise permitted, a commercial park identification sign shall be permitted for a unified development of five or more commercial firms and/or buildings served by a common access road. Such sign shall conform to the following: 
(1)  One for each primary vehicular entrance to the commercial site as determined by the Design Review Board. The vehicular entrance sign may be off-site providing all other legal requirements are met. An additional sign may be permitted to meet special conditions with the approval of the Design Review Board. 
(2)  The sign may contain the name and address of the Commercial Park and names of firms located in the park. 
(3)  The maximum sign face area of a commercial park identification sign shall equal twenty square feet for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area but shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(4)  A maximum height of 25 feet shall be permitted. 
(5)  Such sign shall be located one foot from street right-of-way lines, ten feet from side and rear lot lines, and 75 feet from any residential district line. 
(6)  If a commercial park identification sign is displayed, no other free-standing identification sign in the development shall be located within 100 feet of the road or street on which the commercial park has vehicular access. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.19. - Signs in B-3 Zoning District. 
(A)  If located within the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District all signs shall conform to the color and material standards of Chapter 1136; applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness for all signs. 
(B)  For each building unit not more than one identification sign shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign, projecting sign or a window sign. 
(C)  Two business signs per unit permitted unless otherwise stated in this section. Business signs cannot be more than twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area per sign. Business signs shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign or a window sign. 
(D)  Wall and canopy signs shall not extend above the wall or surface to which they are attached. Wall signs shall be set back from the ends of the building and party wall lines a minimum distance of three feet. 
(E)  Maximum total sign face area of all permanent signs (excluding information signs and open and closed signs, which are exempt from this calculation) shall be related to the width of the building or building unit. Maximum total permanent sign face area shall not exceed 300 square feet and shall be determined as follows: 
Frontage width of building  1.8 
(1)  Free-standing identification signs. Not permitted. 
(2)  Wall identification signs. 
(a)  One per business. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(3)  Window identification signs. 
(a)  One per business. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(4)  Canopy identification signs. 
(a)  One per business. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum for soffit. 
(c)  Twenty square feet maximum for fascia. 
(5)  Projecting identification signs. 
(a)  One per building unit provided there is exterior direct access. 
(b)  No part of any sign shall be closer to either end of the building face on which it is erected than three feet. Where more than one sign is erected on the same face of a building, there shall be a distance of at least nine feet between signs. 
(c)  All measurements shall be from where the sign structure mounts to the building face. 
(d)  Eight square feet maximum. 
(e)  Sign panel, including letters and graphics, shall be no more than four inches thick. 
(f)  Sign panel shall be no closer than six inches from the face of building. 
(g)  Sign panel shall be located at ninety-degrees from the face of the building. 
(h)  Shall be located on the ground level of the building. If a fascia board or other architectural feature exists defining the ground from the upper levels of the building, the sign shall not extend above the fascia board or architectural feature. 
(i)  Sign or sign support shall be no less than eight feet in height above grade over a walkway or sidewalk. 
(j)  No part of the sign shall extend any further than six feet from the building. 
(k)  Sign support material shall be steel, iron, metal, finished wood and/or a synthetic material that has the appearance of steel, iron, metal and/or finished wood. 
(l)  Sign or sign support shall not be permitted to extend or project beyond a line drawn perpendicularly upward from two feet inside the curb line facing a street. 
(m)  Sign shall not be internally illuminated. 
(6)  Free-standing business signs. Not permitted. 
(7)  Wall and/or window business signs. 
(a)  Two per business. 
(b)  Cannot exceed twenty percent (20%) of permitted total permanent sign area. 
(8)  Canopy business signs. Not permitted. 
(9)  Projecting business signs. Not permitted. 
(10)  Free-standing directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(c)  Three feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Ten feet from residential district line. 
(e)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(f)  Five feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(11)  Wall directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(12)  Window directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
(b)  Two square feet maximum. 
(13)  Canopy directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(14)  Projecting directional and information signs. Not permitted. 
(15)  Free-standing real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Six square feet maximum. 
(c)  Four feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Twenty feet from residential district line. 
(e)  One foot from street right-of-way (two feet from comer lot). 
(f)  Twenty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(16)  Wall or window real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(c)  No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of wall or window area. 
(17)  Canopy real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(18)  Projecting real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(19)  Temporary signs. Shall conform to Section 1143.09. 
(20)  Temporary canopy signs. Not permitted. 
(21)  Temporary projecting signs. Not permitted. 
(22)  Portable sidewalk signs. Permitted (see Section 1143.091 for regulations). 
(23)  Information window/wall signs. 
(a)  Combined total of three square feet. 
(24)  Open/closed signs. 
(a)  Three square feet maximum. 
(Ord. 51-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.20. - Signs in M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts. 
(A)  For each building unit not more than one identification sign shall be displayed as either a wall sign, a canopy fascia sign, a window sign or a free-standing identification sign. 
(B)  Maximum total sign face area of all permanent signs (excluding information signs and open and closed signs, which are exempt from this calculation) shall be related to the width of the building or building unit. Maximum total permanent sign face area is determined by the following formulas: 
Frontage width of building  2 if building setback is less than 50 feet; 
Frontage width of building  2.3 if building setback is 50 to 300 feet; 
Frontage width of building  2.6 if building setback is 301 to 600 feet. 
(1)  Free-standing identification signs. 
(a)  One per business street frontage. 
(b)  100 square feet maximum. 
(c)  Twenty feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Seventy-five feet from residential district line. 
(e)  Twenty feet from street right-of-way. 
(f)  Forty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(2)  Wall. window or canopy identification signs. 
(a)  One either wall, window or canopy fascia. 
(b)  Width of building unit  1.2 for wall. 
(c)  Twenty-five percent (25%) of window area for window. 
(d)  Width of building unit  1.2 for canopy fascia. 
(3)  Projecting identification signs. Not permitted. 
(4)  Free-standing business signs. Not permitted. 
(5)  Wall and/or window business signs. Not permitted. 
(6)  Canopy business signs. Not permitted. 
(7)  Projecting business signs. Not permitted. 
(8)  Free-standing directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Four square feet maximum. 
ii.  Four feet in height maximum. 
iii.  Ten feet from residential district line. 
iv.  Five feet from street right-of-way. 
v.  Five feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(9)  Wall directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
(10)  Window directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
(11)  Canopy directional signs. 
(a)  Soffit only. 
(b)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
(12)  Projecting directional signs. 
(a)  Minimum number necessary as determined by Zoning Inspector. 
i.  Two square feet maximum. 
(13)  Free-standing real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Forty square feet maximum. 
(c)  Ten feet in height maximum. 
(d)  Forty feet from residential district line. 
(e)  Five feet from street right-of-way. 
(f)  Thirty feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(14)  Wall real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Fifty square feet maximum. 
(c)  Twelve feet in height maximum. 
(15)  Window real estate signs. 
(a)  One per street frontage. 
(b)  Twenty square feet maximum. 
(c)  Maximum - no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of window area. 
(16)  Canopy real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(17)  Projecting real estate signs. Not permitted. 
(18)  Temporary signs. Shall conform to Section 1143.09. 
(19)  Temporary canopy signs. Not permitted. 
(20)  Temporary projecting signs. Not permitted. 
(21)  Portable sidewalk signs. Permitted (see Section 1143.091 for regulations) 
(22)  Information window/wall signs. 
(a)  Combine total of four square feet maximum. 
(23)  Open/closed signs. 
(a)  Four square feet maximum. 
(C)  Industrial Parks. In addition to signs otherwise permitted, an industrial park identification sign shall be permitted for a unified development of three or more industrial firms and buildings served by a common local access road. Such sign shall conform to the following regulations: 
(a)  One for each street frontage containing vehicular entrance to the industrial park (vehicular entrance may be off-site, providing all other siting for sign is permitted). 
(b)  Can contain name and address of the industrial park and names of firms located in the park. 
(c)  Must be located at a vehicular entrance to the industrial park. 
(d)  100 square feet maximum sign face area per side. 
(e)  Twelve feet in height maximum. 
(f)  Seventy-five feet from residential district line. 
(g)  One foot from street right-of-way. 
(h)  Ten feet from side and rear lot lines. 
If an industrial park identification sign is displayed, no other free-standing identification sign in the development shall be located within 100 feet of the road or street on which the industrial park has vehicular access. 
(Ord. 47-14. Passed 7-10-2014.) 
Sec. 1143.21. - Sign illustrations. 
(See Code Book for illustrations) 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
Sec. 1143.99. - Penalty. 
Any person, entity or corporation who does not correct a violation of this chapter after receiving notice in accordance with Section 1143.12 and within the time limits imposed by Section 1143.12, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such violations continue, after the time limit imposed by Section 1143.12 shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 24-11. Passed 7-28-2011.) 
CHAPTER 1144. - DESIGN REVIEW[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Constitution reference- Ohio Constitution, Art. XVIII, Sec. 3 

Sec. 1144.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of Design Review is to apply standards that preserve and/or enhance the architectural integrity and exterior appearance of development in the City of Marysville, and by so doing, promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors to the community. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.02. - Intent. 
The intent of the design review process is to: 
(A)  Ensure that the location, configuration, and architectural design of buildings and their materials and colors are visually harmonious on the planned site and with surrounding development and the environment. 
(B)  Ensure that the location, configuration, and design of signs and their materials and colors are consistent with the character and scale of the buildings to which they relate and surrounding development. 
(C)  Safeguard and enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and quality of the City to protect and enhance the City's attractiveness to residents, tourists and visitors, and to stimulate business and industry by encouraging excellence in design. 
(D)  Encourage superior design quality of the City and strengthen civic pride in the aesthetic environment of Marysville. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.03. - Establishment; duties and responsibilities. 
(A)  Establishment. The Design Review Board is hereby established. The Design Review Board shall consist of seven members. Of the seven members, four members shall be appointed by City Council, each being residents of the City. The remaining three members shall be appointed by the City Manager from members of the Planning Commission. Terms of office shall be for four years, provided that upon initial formation of the Board, one Council appointee shall be appointed for one year, one Council appointee shall be appointed for two years, one Council appointee shall be appointed for three years, and one Council appointee shall be appointed for four years. The term for a City Manager appointed Board member shall expire at the same time as his/her term on the Planning Commission expires. Term shall begin thirty days after enactment of this legislation. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his/her predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term. As determined appropriate by City Council, members of the Design Review Board may receive compensation. To provide a well-qualified Design Review Board, a good faith effort should be made to appoint at least four of the seven members who have the following professional experience: 
(1)  An individual who is a commercial property owner or business person who operates a commercial business; 
(2)  An engineer, an architect or a person who has engineering or architectural experience; 
(3)  A contractor or a person who has construction experience; 
(4)  A landscape architect or landscape contractor or a person who operates a nursery or has landscaping experience; or, 
(5)  A historic preservation specialist, or an individual who has extensive historical preservation or building inspection experience. 
(B)  Duties and Responsibilities. The Design Review Board shall review Certificate of Appropriateness and Exterior Plan applications in accordance with Chapters 1136, 1140, and 1144. The Design Review Board shall also perform any other duties outlined in the Planning and Zoning Code and approved Rules of Procedure for its operation. 
(C)  Rules of Procedure. The Rules of Procedure are on file with the City and shall be available for public inspection upon request. 
(D)  Maintaining a System for the Survey of Historic Properties. The Design Review Board shall maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic properties, including the following: 
(1)  The Board shall initiate or maintain a process approved by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office for the survey and inventory of resources within its jurisdiction. 
(2)  The Board shall maintain a detailed inventory of the designated districts, sites and structures under its jurisdiction. 
(3)  The Board shall maintain securely all inventory material, and have that inventory available to the public. 
(4)  The Board shall maintain the inventories on Ohio Historic Inventory/Ohio Archaeological Inventory forms, or forms compatible with the Ohio Historic Preservation Office's computerized inventory. 
(5)  The Board shall make the appropriate inventory forms available to the Ohio Historic Preservation Office through duplicates (with contact prints). 
(6)  The Board shall periodically update the inventory forms to reflect changes. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.04. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are herewith defined. 
(A)  Accenting Colors. Color(s) that accentuate or contrast with something else, such as a touch of color that makes the features of an image stand out. 
(B)  Board. Means the Design Review Board of the City of Marysville as established in Section 1144.03. 
(C)  Contemporary Durable Materials. Includes but is not limited to those building materials that appear identical to natural materials and have the same or a higher level of durability than natural materials, but are manufactured through alternative methods and materials. 
(D)  Design Review District. Shall mean the established Design Review District as described in this chapter. 
(E)  Earth Tone Color. Color scheme(s) that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, grays, greens, blues, purples and some reds. 
(F)  Facade. The exterior walls of a structure. 
(G)  Harmonious. A quality which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in the arrangement of architectural and landscape elements. 
(H)  Historic Colors. Those colors taken from any paint manufacturer's historic paint palette. Historic colors shall be appropriate to the era of the structure and/or district. 
(I)  Mechanical/Electrical Hardware and Equipment. Includes but is not limited to equipment, devices and accessories, the use of which relates to ventilating, air conditioning, heating and similar purposes. 
(J)  New Structure. Shall mean anything newly constructed or erected, except for fences, decks, signs, trash enclosures, swimming pools, playground equipment and accessory structures under 250 sq. ft., which requires location on the ground. 
(K)  Modification. Includes additions and any exterior alterations that involve exterior material changes, additions and/or removal of architectural features. 
(L)  Opacity. The quality or state of a body that makes it impervious to the rays of light; the relative capacity of matter to obstruct the transmission of radiant energy. 
(M)  Site Hardware. Includes but is not limited to street furniture, lighting standards, mailboxes, control boxes, newspaper boxes and similar appurtenances. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.05. - Exterior plan required by Design Review Board for Design Review Districts. 
(A)  A zoning permit for a structure(s) classified as a New Structure or Modification shall be issued only after an Exterior Plan has been submitted to and approved by the Design Review Board, or as approved per Section 1144.071 or Section 1144.072. 
(B)  The Exterior Plan, as approved, shall be part of the zoning permit and the structure or complex shall be constructed in conformity with the Exterior Plan as approved by the Design Review Board. 
(C)  Properties located within the Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) (including the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District) shall be subject to Chapter 1136 of this Zoning Code and the Design Guidelines for Historic Uptown Marysville, Ohio and shall not be subject to the Design Review standards in this chapter. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.06. - Exterior plan Application. 
(A)  Applications for the approval of the Exterior Plan Application: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(B)  Staff shall review the submitted materials for completeness and shall: 
(1)  If it is found to be complete, place the Exterior Plan application on the next appropriate Design Review Board agenda; or 
(2)  If it is found to be incomplete, reject the application and return the application and fee to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
(C)  Exterior work on a structure that requires approval by the Design Review Board shall not commence until approval is granted by the Design Review Board. Should work commence prior to the Design Review Board approval, the property owner shall be subject to penalties per Section 1125.99 of the Planning and Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.07. - Exterior plan approval. 
(A)  The Design Review Board shall, after receipt of reports from City staff and the applicable City Commissions, determine whether the Exterior Plan shall be approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved. The Exterior Plan shall not be approved unless the Design Review Board finds that: 
(1)  All of the applicable provisions in the Planning and Zoning Code are complied with. 
(2)  That the site plan meets the purpose and intent of this chapter, including the location and configuration of the building(s), landscaping, off-street parking, driveways and site amenities are visually harmonious within the site and its surroundings. 
(B)  If the Exterior Plan is disapproved, the reasons for a disapproving vote shall be stated by those members and it shall be captured in the minutes of the meeting. 
(C)  Exterior Plans must be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved within thirty (30) working days from the date of receipt. This thirty day period may be extended by the mutual agreement of the Design Review Board and the applicant. 
(D)  Exterior Plan approval shall be for a period not to exceed two years from the approval date of the Exterior Plan. If no construction has begun within two years after approval is granted, the approved Exterior Plan shall become null and void. 
(E)  Exterior plans approved prior to the adoption of this section, in which work has not commenced, shall become null and void one (1) year after the adoption of this section. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.071. - Revisions to plans after approval. 
Exterior Plans which have been previously approved by the Design Review Board, and require minor modifications may be made with the approval of the City Manager, City Engineer and the Chair of the Design Review Board. To apply, the applicant shall submit to the City Zoning Administrator four (4) sets of the previously approved plans and the proposed minor modification, along with a written statement explaining the reason for the proposed minor modification. Within ten (10) working days after the plan submission, the City Manager, City Engineer and the Chair of the Design Review Board shall review and approve or disapprove the minor modification. Approval shall be granted only if the City Manager, City Engineer and the Chair of the Design Review Board unanimously agree the minor modification does not significantly change the previously approved plan. If unanimous consent is not obtained, the proposed minor modifications are disapproved and can only be made if approved by the Design Review Board. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.072. - Exterior plan approval for new structures and/or modifications to existing structures not visible from any street right-of-way. 
Exterior Plan Approval for new structures and/or modifications to existing structures may be approved by the Zoning Administrator if the Zoning Administrator, City Engineer, City Manager and the Chair of the Design Review Board unanimously determine that the new structures and/or modifications will not be visible from any existing or foreseeable future street right-of-way. The proposed new structures and/or modifications shall meet all applicable design requirements established in Sections 1144.08-1144.11. Said section shall not apply to properties located within any designated Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s); including the Historic Uptown Marysville Design Review District. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.08. - Design Review Districts established. 
In order to apply the appropriate design review standards to different land uses and areas within the community, the following Design Review Districts are hereby established: 
(A)  Multi-Family Residential Design Review District (DRD-1). The Multi-Family Review District (DRD-1) shall include any multi-family dwelling and any property located within a planned unit development that is to be developed as multi-family residential. 
(B)  Commercial and Office Design Review District (DRD-2). The Commercial and Office Design Review District (DRD-2) shall include all properties, excluding those containing single-family dwelling units, within the City boundaries that are zoned OR, BR, NC, B-1, SD-1, TOC, GOV and HMD, any property located within a planned unit development that is to be developed as a commercial use or for office use, and any created commercial or office zoning district. 
(C)  Manufacturing Design Review District (DRD-3). The Manufacturing Design Review District (DRD-3) shall include all properties, excluding those containing single-family dwelling units, within the City boundaries that are zoned M-1 and M-2, any property located within a planned unit development that is to be developed as manufacturing use, and any created manufacturing zoning district. 
(D)  The Design Review Board also reviews Certificate of Appropriateness applications for any Historic Design Review District(s) and Landmark(s) as defined in Chapter 1136. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1144.09. - Design Review standards for Multi-Family Residential Design Review District (DRD-1) 
The purpose of the DRD-1 District is to encourage a high quality, attractive, and lasting style in multi-family residential developments. 
(A)  Building Architecture. 
(1)  Design. All buildings shall provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. Buildings shall be designed to be seen from three hundred sixty (360) degrees and have the same level of finish on all elevations. Building additions and accessory structures, whether attached or detached, shall be of similar design, materials and construction to that of the existing or principle structure. 
(2)  Color. Specific colors and color schemes shall be designed to be compatible and harmonious with those of the buildings in the surrounding area. Colors shall be natural earth tone. The color white is also encouraged. Facade colors shall be subtle and of low reflectance. Accent colors may be used to highlight architectural features. Prohibited accent colors shall include metallic and fluorescent. 
(3)  Articulation. A building frontage that exceeds a width of fifty (50) feet shall incorporate articulation and offset of the wall plane to inhibit a large expanse of blank wall and add interest to the facades. Where a structure has a front loaded garage, the garage shall be placed a minimum of two feet behind the front building facade. 
(4)  Materials. Building materials shall be of high quality and durability, and architectural features shall be used to create visual interest and livability of the multi-family dwellings. All structures shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with each other by employing similar roof pitches, architectural details and be constructed of compatible exterior building materials. A minimum of forty (40) percent of each and every faade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted primary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. A minimum of sixty (60) percent of each and every faade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted secondary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Other facades shall use a combination of permitted primary and permitted secondary materials, as determined by the Design Review Board. Use of a permitted secondary material for an entire faade is not permitted. 
(a)  Permitted primary building materials shall be high quality, durable materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted primary building materials may include, but are not limited to brick, fiber cement siding, glass (glazed aluminum or steel curtain walls), stone, manufactured stone, and wood siding. 
(b)  Permitted secondary building materials shall be determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted secondary building materials may include, but are not limited to stucco, metal, and split faced concrete block. 
(c)  Aluminum and/or vinyl shall be allowed for trim details, such as soffits, gutters, shutters, etc., and shall not be used as a permitted primary or secondary material. 
(d)  Minimum butt thickness of clapboard siding shall be a quarter of an inch. 
(e)  Permitted Secondary materials may be used as Primary building materials as determined and approved by the Design Review Board. 
(f)  Other High quality durable materials may be approved as permitted primary or secondary materials by the Design Review Board with examples of successful, high quality installations in similar construction applications. 
(5)  Roofing . Roofing shall be compatible and harmonious with building materials and color scheme. All pitched roofs shall be of dimensional shingles, standing seam metal, slate or simulated slate. 
(B)  Site Design. 
(1)  Site layout. Principal buildings, accessory buildings, fencing, parking areas, access drives, storm water facilities, pedestrian walkways, and landscaping shall be arranged to provide a visually appealing development that takes the existing topographic features and neighboring properties into consideration. Aesthetically pleasing attributes shall be visible throughout the entire development and the public right-of-way. Multi-family structures shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from other such structures. 
(2)  Natural features. Existing natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, ravines, woodlands, and wetlands shall be retained and incorporated into the new development. 
(3)  Open Space. Open space areas in multi-family developments shall be provided for recreational activities for the residents and shall maintain the residential character of the development. If the development is adjacent to a public park, school, recreational area or commercial area, or similar type area, the developer shall provide pedestrian access to those areas. 
(4)  Parking and access drives. All vehicle use areas, including but not limited to parking areas and access drives, shall consist of a paved surface material with concrete curb. Paved surface materials shall consist of a sealed surface material of asphalt or concrete and along with the curbing shall be constructed to City standards unless a viable or environmentally friendly solution is recommended by the Design Review Board and approved by the City Engineer. The length from the parking area to the building should not be greater than 250 feet. 
(5)  Sidewalk and bike path. Site design shall provide a pedestrian friendly system. All developments shall provide pedestrian walkways between public sidewalks/streets and building entrances. Sidewalks shall also be installed along all existing public streets if sidewalks do not presently exist. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the minimums set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City. 
(6)  Lighting. Lighting shall enhance the visual appearance of the development. The color and design of the light poles and fixtures shall be designed to complement the architectural character of the buildings. 
(7)  Fencing. Chain link, barbed wire, razor barb, and electrically charged fencing are not permitted. Masonry, wood, vinyl fencing, or decorative metal fencing is encouraged. 
(8)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the requirements outlined in Chapter 1140. 
(C)  Trash Enclosures. Trash containers or receptacles (including recycling containers) shall be screened or enclosed with a trash enclosure meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Trash containers, service areas and loading zones shall be located at the rear of the building. Trash containers, service areas and loading zones may be permitted on the side of a building if not oriented towards a public or private street and properly screened from public or private streets and residential zoning districts. 
(2)  The trash enclosure shall have four ( 4) sides with opening doors for the purpose of trash removal. 
(3)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed of a wooden or vinyl fence structure, or masonry wall with an opacity of one hundred percent (100%) and a height of one foot above the top of the tallest container. 
(4)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed and located so that the opening doors are wide enough to accommodate a garbage truck emptying and replacing the trash container or receptacle. 
(5)  The building materials used for the trash enclosures shall be compatible with the building materials used on the principal building. A reinforced concrete pad and approach apron shall be constructed under and in front of the enclosed area. 
(6)  Gates and doors on the enclosure shall be of wood, vinyl, hardiplank or any alternative material the Board deems suitable. Fencing with slats is prohibited. 
(7)  The location of trash enclosures shall be as inconspicuous as possible. 
(D)  Signs. In addition to the requirements in Chapter 1143 - Signs, the following guidelines should apply: 
(1)  Height. Signage shall be low profile to avoid adversely affecting the residential area. 
(2)  Design. Signage shall be compatible with topographic features and the architectural design of the principal building, with a color scheme that is compatible with that of the principal building. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 66-17 . Passed 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 1144.10. - Design Review standards for Commercial and Office Design Review District (DRD-2). 
The purpose of the DRD-2 District is to encourage a high quality, attractive and lasting style in commercial and office development. 
(A)  Building Architecture. 
(1)  Design. All buildings shall provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. Buildings shall be designed to be seen from three hundred sixty (360) degrees and have the same level of finish on all elevations. Building additions and accessory structures, whether attached or detached, shall be of similar design, materials, and construction to that of the existing or principal structure. 
(2)  Color. Specific colors and color schemes shall be designed to be compatible and harmonious with those of the buildings in the surrounding area. Colors shall be natural earth tone. The color white is also encouraged. Facade colors shall be subtle and of low reflectance. Accent colors may be used to highlight architectural features. Prohibited accent colors include metallic and fluorescent. 
(3)  Architectural Features. The purpose of requiring four-sided architecture is to avoid large areas of blank exterior. For every one hundred (100) feet of elevation width, each side and rear elevation must contain at least two (2) design elements and each front elevation must contain at least three (3) design elements. For multi-story buildings, each story on a single elevation shall contain at least two (2) design elements. Typical design elements are as follows: 
(a)  A door of at least twenty-eight (28) square feet in area with an awning, window, faux window or other feature subject to approval by the Design Review Board. 
(b)  A window of at least six (6) square feet in area. Windows closer than ten (10) feet shall be considered as one (1) element. A set of adjacent windows, such as double or bay windows, shall be considered as one element. 
(c)  A chimney. 
(d)  An articulated Gable Vent of at least four (4) square feet in area. 
(e)  Porches, decks or similar structures. 
(f)  A similar significant permanent architectural feature consisting with this style of the building upon approval by the Design Review Board. 
(4)  Articulation. A building frontage that exceeds a width of fifty (50) feet shall incorporate articulation and offset of the wall plane to inhibit a large expanse of blank wall and add interest to the facades. 
(5)  Materials. A minimum of eighty (80) percent of each and every facade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted primary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of each and every faade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted secondary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Other facades shall use a combination of permitted primary and permitted secondary materials, as determined by the Design Review Board. Use of a permitted secondary material for an entire faade is not permitted. 
(a)  Permitted primary building materials shall be high quality, durable materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted primary building materials may include, but are not limited to brick, fiber cement siding, glass (glazed aluminum or steel curtain walls), stone, manufactured stone, and wood siding. 
(b)  Permitted secondary building materials shall be determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted secondary building materials may include, but are not limited to stucco, metal, and split faced concrete block. 
(c)  Aluminum and/or vinyl shall be allowed for trim details, such as soffits, gutters, shutters, etc., and shall not be used as a permitted primary or secondary material. 
(d)  Minimum butt thickness of clapboard siding shall be a quarter of an inch. 
(e)  Permitted Secondary materials may be used as Primary building materials as determined and approved by the Design Review Board. 
(f)  Other High quality durable materials may be approved as permitted primary or secondary materials by the Design Review Board with examples of successful, high quality installations in similar construction applications. 
(6)  Glass. Elevations facing the primary street shall be a minimum of forty (40) percent glass between the height of two (2) feet and ten (10) feet and have an unobstructed view of the building interior to a depth of four (4) feet. The use of black, gold, green, silver or any other reflective colored glass on a building is prohibited. The use of spandrel glass is also prohibited. Frosted glass may be permitted in some cases, subject to approval of the Design Review Board. 
(7)  Building Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented to face the primary street right-of-way. An entryway shall be located on the front of the building. Comer entrances are acceptable to meet this requirement if one side of the comer entrance faces the primary street right-of-way. 
(8)  Roofing. All pitched roofs shall be of dimensional shingles, standing seam metal, slate or simulated slate. 
(9)  Mechanical Equipment. All external and rooftop mechanical equipment, including satellite antennas, and trash dumpsters shall be screened from view at all property lines on which the building is located. Screening materials shall be complimentary to those used on the majority of the building. For ground mounted equipment, landscaping is the preferred method of screening. If two or more buildings are located on the same property, rooftop equipment shall not be visible at ground level within fifty (50) feet from any building. 
(10)  Drive Thru Features. A drive thru shall be designed as an integral part of the structure it serves. Features incorporated with a drive thru, including, but not limited to canopies, awnings, and support posts, shall match the materials and color scheme of the building they are serving. Drive thru features shall not have any pick-up windows, ordering areas, signage, or other related items located on the front elevation of a building or located between the front of the building and street right-of-way. 
(11)  In-Line Retail Exemption. Side or rear elevations of in-line retail developments may be exempt from the building design standards of Section 1144.10 if such elevations are not visible to customer traffic, a public right-of-way or if a future phase of the inline retail development is forthcoming adjacent to the elevation. Such exempt elevations shall use materials complimentary to the primary elevation and be screened by landscaping, mounding, fencing or a combination thereof, as outlined in Section 1144.10 and as deemed appropriate by the Design Review Board. 
(12)  Outdoor Display and Storage Areas. Outdoor display of merchandise for sale, including outdoor dining and outdoor storage or foods and materials, other than for automotive sales, shall comply with the following: 
(a)  General Requirements. 
i.  Location. 
a.  Areas devoted to outdoor display or outdoor storage shall comply with all building setbacks and yard regulations for the district in which they are located as set forth in this chapter. 
b.  All outdoor display and storage areas must be contiguous to the principal building; however, such areas shall be space a sufficient distance from the building, as dictated by the City Fire Department, to satisfy any safety requirements. 
c.  No outdoor display or storage area shall be permitted to occupy or interfere with traffic circulation, required parking areas, public sidewalks, or pedestrian access. 
ii.  Area. The area of the lot devoted to outdoor display and storage shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the principal building. This limitation shall not apply when outdoor display is listed as a permitted use. 
iii.  Surfacing. Areas devoted to outdoor display and storage shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and free of dust. 
iv.  Height. 
a.  Outdoor display area located in front of a principal building shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
b.  The height of outdoor display or outdoor storage areas which are located to the side or rear of the building shall be determined by the Design Review Board. Such determination shall take into account such issues as proposed fencing and/or walls, roofing materials, if any, and landscape and screening. 
v.  Signs. 
a.  No signs shall be permitted in conjunction with outdoor display or outdoor storage areas except those otherwise in compliance with the sign regulation in Chapter 1143 or as regulated in (B) and (C) below. 
b.  Within an enclosed outdoor storage or outdoor display area. Pricing signs may be used as long as signs are related to the product being sold and are incorporated into the product display. Pricing signs shall not be permitted on a wall or fence used to demarcate the outdoor display or storage area unless in compliance with the sign regulations in Chapter 1143. 
c.  Within an unenclosed outdoor storage or outdoor display area, pricing signs which are related to the product being sold and which are incorporated into the product display shall be permitted. The total area of such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet. 
(b)  Supplemental Regulations for Outdoor Display. The outdoor display area must be defined by or contained within an appropriate architectural or decorative demarcation as approved by the Design Review Board. This may include the use of landscaping elements, fencing, walls or other appropriate material. If building materials are utilized, the materials shall be consistent with the architectural design of the principal structure as approved by the Design Review Board. 
(B)  Site Design. 
(1)  Built-to-Line. To promote quality streets, buildings shall be located at the built-to-lines along public roadway frontages. Build-to-lines shall refer to the associated front yard setback as state in each applicable zoning district. 
(a)  In order to achieve quality streetscapes, variation from the build-to line will be permitted to allow for added green space, amenities, outdoor seating and the like. Buildings may be located further from the right-of-way than the established build-to-line per the following: 
Building Height Variation from Build-to-Line One Story Building 0 feet to 5 feet Two Story Building 0 feet to 10 feet Three Story Building 0 feet to 15 feet  
(b)  At least fifty (50) percent of the building's front elevation shall be located within the applicable variation from the build-to-line range. 
(c)  Uncovered seating areas or architectural features may project up to five (5) feet closer to the right-of-way than the established build-to- line. 
(d)  Buildings larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or attached to existing in-line retail space shall be exempt from the build-to-line requirements if located more than three hundred (300) feet from the right-of-way. 
(2)  Natural Features. Existing natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, ravines, woodlands, and wetlands are highly encouraged to be retained and incorporated into the new development. 
(3)  Fencing. Chain link fencing shall be limited to areas behind the front facade(s) of the primary building. Masonry, wood, vinyl, or decorative metal fencing is encouraged. Barbed wire, razor barb and electrically charged fencing are not permitted. 
(4)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the requirements outlined in Chapter 1140. 
(5)  Sidewalk and Bike Path. Site design shall provide a pedestrian friendly system. All developments shall provide pedestrian walkways between public sidewalks/streets and building entrances. Sidewalks shall also be installed along all existing public streets if sidewalks do not presently exist. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the minimums set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City. 
(6)  Adjacent Pavement. Pavement is prohibited directly adjacent to any building elevation, except for loading areas, vehicular building entrances, and drive thru windows, or at entrance walkways into the building. 
(7)  Utility Boxes. Utility boxes shall be located to the rear of the building and painted the same, or primary color of the building elevation where the utility box is located. 
(C)  Trash Enclosures. Trash containers or receptacles (including recycling containers) shall be screened or enclosed with a trash enclosure meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Trash Containers, service areas and loading zones shall be located at the rear of the building. Trash containers, service areas and loading zones may be permitted on the side of a building if not oriented towards a public or private street and properly screened from public or private streets and residential zoning districts. 
(2)  The trash enclosure shall have four (4) sides with opening doors for the purpose of trash removal. 
(3)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed of a wooden or vinyl fence structure, or masonry wall with an opacity of one hundred percent (100%) and a height of one foot above the top of the tallest container. 
(4)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed so that the opening doors are wide enough to accommodate a garbage truck emptying and replacing the trash container or receptacle. 
(5)  The building materials used for the trash enclosures shall be compatible with the building materials used on the principal building. A reinforced concrete pad and approach apron shall be constructed under and in front of the enclosed area. 
(6)  Gates and doors on the enclosure shall be of a wood, vinyl, hardiplank or any alternative material the Board deems suitable. Fencing with slats is prohibited. 
(7)  The location of enclosures shall be as inconspicuous as possible. 
(D)  Parking Lot Design. Parking lot areas shall be designed to reduce their visual impact, production of excess heat and effect on drainage. Appropriately sized landscape areas shall be provided within each parking lot area allowing for a variety of shade trees to be planted that will not buckle the parking lot surface and at the same time provide shade. Therefore, all off-street parking lot areas shall be designed using the "parking bay" concept, which consists of parking spaces grouped together and each parking bay separated by landscape tree islands. 
(1)  Parking and Access Drives. All vehicle use areas, including but not limited to parking areas, driveways, aisles, access drives and other circulation areas, shall consist of a paved surface material with concrete asphalt or concrete and along with the curbing shall be constructed to City standards unless a viable or environmentally friendly solution is recommended by the Design Review Board and approved by the City Engineer. 
(2)  Parking Lot Locations. All parking spaces, drives or other structures for vehicular parking or movement shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building with no more than fifty (50) percent of such parking area located to the side of the principal building. 
(a)  Buildings larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or attached to existing in-line retail space shall be permitted to have parking to the front of the building if the building is located more than three hundred (300) feet from the right-of-way and the parking lot is located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from the right-of-way. 
(b)  If a drive thru is located on-site and designed per Section 1144.10(A)(10) of this Zoning Code, a drive lane may be permitted to be located in front of the building. In such case, the building shall be moved the furthest away from the build-to-line as indicated in Section 1144.10(B)(1)(a). 
(3)  Parking Bays. No parking bay shall contain more than twenty-four (24) total parking spaces, with a maximum of twelve (12) spaces in a single row. 
(4)  Maximum Number of Parking Spaces. Off-street parking areas shall only be permitted to have twenty-five (25) percent more spaces than stated as the applicable minimum in Section 1141 of this Zoning Code. 
(a)  Parking spaces above the maximum shall be permitted with an additional sixty (60) square feet of landscaping provided for every one (1) additional parking spaces. The provided additional landscaping shall be in addition to the minimum landscaping required in Section 1140 of this Zoning Code. 
(b)  Additional landscaping shall include a mix of trees and shrubs and be clearly identified as additional landscaping on the site's landscape plan. 
(5)  Parking Lot Islands. Each landscaped tree island in a single loaded parking stall design shall be a minimum area of one hundred and sixty-two (162) square feet with a minimum width of nine (9) feet. Each landscaped island located in a double loaded parking stall design shall have a minimum area of three hundred twenty-four (324) square feet, with a minimum width of nine (9) feet. The landscaped tree island(s) shall contain at least one shade tree and include at least fifty (50) square feet of other plant materials. 
(6)  Bioswales. Bioswales, also referred to as rain gardens, may be incorporated in the overall parking lot design. In addition to separating parking bars, when properly designed bios wales/rain gardens can also assist with stormwater quality and quantity management. 
(7)  Intersection Site Distance. When a drive isle intersects with an internal service road, nothing shall materially impede the vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet for the area bounded by the intersecting street lines of those roadways and a line joining points along said roadways fifteen (15) feet from the point of intersection. 
(E)  Site Lighting. Site lighting shall be required for all developments and be designed to sufficiently illuminate the site and minimize spillover off of the property. 
(1)  Design. All external lighting shall be decorative or historic in design. Typical "shoe box" light fixtures are not acceptable. Pack light, wall pack lights and similar lights that primarily shine perpendicular to (away from) a building's elevation are not permitted on any building elevation. Decorative wall lights that shine parallel to (up or down) a building's elevation are subject to approval by the Design Review Board. 
(2)  Lighting Intensity. Foot candles measure the intensity of light. One foot candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on a square foot surface one foot away. All Parking lot areas shall have lighting intensity meeting the following standard as measured at grade: 
Maximum intensity 20 Foot Candles Average intensity 1 to 3 Foot Candles  
(3)  Light Spillage. All outdoor lighting shall be directed, reflected or shielded so as not to be of excessive brightness or cause glare hazardous to pedestrians, or drivers, create a nuisance or unreasonably interfere with a neighboring property owner's right to enjoy his property. Light spillage shall not exceed one tenth (0.1) foot candles when adjacent to a residential district or existing residential use. 
(4)  Light Pole Height. Pole heights should be in harmony with the parcel, building and parking lot size as well as the surrounding area. Smaller parcels in a more dense condition pole height should be limited in height to respond to the smaller parcels and more human scale of the site. In large commercial centers with large building footprints, parcels and parking lots, the pole heights can be higher to reduce the number of poles needed to adequately light the site. Parking lots with thirty (30) or less spaces shall have a maximum lighting pole height of eighteen (18) feet. Parking lots with more than thirty (30) spaces shall have a maximum lighting pole height of thirty (30) feet. 
(F)  Signs. In addition to the requirements in Chapter 1143 - Signs, the following guidelines should apply: 
(1)  Height. Signage shall be low profile to avoid adversely affecting the commercial and office areas. 
(2)  Design. Signage shall be compatible with topographic features and the architectural design of the principal building, with a color scheme that is compatible with that of the principal building. 
(3)  Monument Signs. All freestanding signs shall be monument-type, have a base consistent with the primary building material and have a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of year-round landscaping around all sides of the monument sign. 
(4)  Prohibited Signs. Cabinet box, exposed neon, exposed LED, changeable copy (manual or electronic), roof-mounted, monopole, rotating, signs with flashing messages or bare bulbs, signs on backlit awnings off-premise signs, billboards, and bench signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 67-17 . Passed 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 1144.11. - Design Review standards for Manufacturing Design Review District (DRD-3). 
The purpose of the DRD-3 District is to encourage a high quality, attractive and lasting style in manufacturing development. 
(A)  Building Architecture. 
(1)  Design. All buildings shall provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. Buildings shall be designed to be seen from three hundred sixty (360) degrees and have the same level of finish on all elevations. Building additions and accessory structures, whether attached or detached, shall be of similar design, materials and construction to that of the existing or principal structure. 
(2)  Materials. Building materials shall be of high quality and durability, and architectural features shall be used to create visual interest and usability of the manufacturing buildings. A minimum of forty (40) percent of each and every facade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted primary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. A minimum of sixty (60) percent of each and every faade, visible from a street or right-of-way as determined by the Design Review Board, exclusive of windows, doors, and garage doors shall be constructed of permitted secondary materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Other facades shall use a combination of permitted primary and permitted secondary materials, as determined by the Design Review Board. Use of a permitted secondary material for an entire faade is not permitted. 
(a)  Permitted primary building materials shall be high quality, durable materials as determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted primary building materials may include, but are not limited to brick, fiber cement siding, glass (glazed aluminum or steel curtain walls), stone, manufactured stone, and wood siding. 
(b)  Permitted secondary building materials shall be determined by the Design Review Board. Permitted secondary building materials may include, but are not limited to stucco, metal, and split faced concrete block. 
(c)  Aluminum and/or vinyl shall be allowed for trim details, such as soffits, gutters, shutters, etc., and shall not be used as a permitted primary or secondary material. 
(d)  Minimum butt thickness of clapboard siding shall be a quarter of an inch. 
(e)  Permitted Secondary materials may be used as Primary building materials as determined and approved by the Design Review Board. 
(f)  Other High quality durable materials may be approved as permitted primary or secondary materials by the Design Review Board with examples of successful, high quality installations in similar construction applications. 
(3)  Color. Specific colors and color schemes shall be designed to be compatible and harmonious with those of the buildings in the surrounding area. Colors shall be natural earth tones. The color white is also encouraged. Facade colors shall be subtle and of low reflectance; Accent colors may be used to highlight architectural features. Prohibited accent colors include metallic and fluorescent. 
(4)  Facades and exterior walls. Facades shall be articulated to reduce the massive scale and impersonal appearances of large manufacturing buildings and shall provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. Facades greater than seventy-five (75) feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate material breaks, projections and/or recesses. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet. The office portions of the building(s) shall meet the guidelines required for office buildings constructed in the DRD-2 Design Review District. 
(5)  Roofing. Pitched roofs are encouraged for building facades along public rights-of-way. Flat roofs shall be permitted along public rights-of-way only with the integration of strong cornice lines. All flat roofs shall be required to have a parapet and/or a means of screening all rooftop mechanical equipment. All rooftop screening must be consistent and harmonious to the building's facade and character. 
(B)  Site Design. 
(1)  Site layout. Principal buildings, accessory buildings, fencing, parking areas, access drives, storm water facilities, pedestrian walkways, and landscaping shall be arranged to provide a visually appealing development that takes the existing topographic features and neighboring properties into consideration. 
(2)  Natural features. Existing natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, ravines, woodlands, and wetlands shall be retained and incorporated into the new development. 
(3)  Parking and access drives. All vehicle use areas, including but not limited to parking areas and access drives, shall consist of a paved surface material with concrete curb. Paved surface materials shall consist of a sealed surface material of asphalt or concrete and along with the curbing shall be constructed to City standards unless a viable or environmentally friendly solution is recommended by the Design Review Board and approved by the City Engineer. Vehicular storage or heavy equipment use areas may also use alternative surface materials, as recommended by the Design Review Board and approved by the City Engineer. 
(4)  Pedestrian safety. Site design shall provide a pedestrian friendly system. All developments shall provide pedestrian walkways between public sidewalks/streets and building entrances. Sidewalks shall also be installed along all existing public streets if sidewalks do not presently exist. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the minimums set forth in the "Standard Construction Drawings" of the City. 
(5)  Lighting. Lighting shall enhance the visual appearance of the development. Color and design of the light poles and fixtures shall be designed to complement the architectural character of the buildings. 
(6)  Fencing. Chain link fencing shall be limited to areas behind the front facade(s) of the primary building. Masonry, wood, vinyl or decorative metal fencing is encouraged. 
(7)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the requirements outlined in Chapter 1140. 
(C)  Outdoor Storage, Mechanical Hardware and Equipment, Trash Collection, and Loading Areas. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, mechanical hardware and equipment, trash collection, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are minimized to adjacent properties and public streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. 
(D)  Trash Enclosures. Trash containers or receptacles (including recycling containers) shall be screened or enclosed with a trash enclosure meeting the following criteria. 
(1)  Trash containers, service areas and loading zones shall be located at the rear of the building. Trash containers, service areas and loading zones may be permitted on the side of a building if not oriented towards a public or private street and properly screened from public or private streets and residential zoning districts. 
(2)  The trash enclosure shall have four (4) sides with opening doors for the purpose of trash removal. 
(3)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed of a wooden or vinyl fence structure, or masonry wall with an opacity of one hundred percent (100%) and a height of one foot above the top of the tallest container. 
(4)  The trash enclosure shall be constructed so that the opening doors are wide enough to accommodate a garbage truck emptying and replacing the trash container or receptacle. 
(5)  The building materials used for the trash enclosures shall be compatible with the building materials used on the principal building. A reinforced concrete pad and approach apron shall be constructed under and in front of the enclosed area. 
(6)  Gates and doors on the enclosure shall be of a wood, vinyl, hardiplank or any alternative material the Board deems suitable. Fencing with slats is prohibited. 
(7)  The location of enclosures shall be as inconspicuous as possible. 
(8)  The trash enclosure shall not be required if the trash containers or receptacles are otherwise screened or enclosed from public view as determined by the Design Review Board. 
(E)  Signs. In addition to the requirements in Chapter 1143 - Signs, the following guidelines should apply: 
(1)  Height. Signage shall be low profile to avoid adversely affecting the areas surrounding the industrial site. 
(2)  Design. Signage shall be compatible with topographic features and the architectural design of the principal building. 
(3)  Monument Signs. All freestanding signs shall be monument-type, have a base consistent with the primary building material and have a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of year-round landscaping around all sides of the monument sign. 
(4)  Prohibited Signs. Cabinet box, exposed neon, exposed LED, changeable copy (manual or electronic), roof-mounted, monopole, rotating, signs with flashing messages or bare bulbs, signs on backlit awnings, off-premise signs, billboards and bench signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 68-17 . Passed 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 1144.12. - Appeal. 
Any person whose plan has been disapproved or who has otherwise been aggrieved by a decision of the Design Review Board, Zoning Inspector or designee may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Please refer to Chapter 1129. 
(Ord. 33-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
CHAPTER 1145. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference- Planned unit development application,  1105.02; planned unit development defined,  1123.01(B)(74). 
State Law reference- Planning Commission powers and duties, ORC 713.02, 713.06. 
State Constitution reference- Ohio Constitution, Art. XVIII, Sec. 3. 

Sec. 1145.01. - Objectives for a planned unit development (PUD). 
(A)  General Objective. A planned unit development shall be classified as a unique zoning district or combination of districts that is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The purpose is to encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design of land development than is possible under standard zoning district regulations. A PUD is intended to allow flexibility in planning and design and overall benefits to the City. A PUD also permits the establishment of a variety of uses brought together as parts of a compatible and unified plan. This flexibility should result in a development that has unique characteristics and features that are not found in a development produced in accordance with standard zoning district and subdivision regulations. 
(B)  Specific Objectives. 
(1)  To encourage unified projects that exhibit creative planning and design in ways that cannot be achieved through a standard zoning district, yet is consistent with all applicable plans including but not limited to the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan and the intent of the Planning and Zoning Code. 
(2)  Allow the creation of development standards that respect the unique characteristics, natural quality and beauty of the site and the immediate vicinity and protect the community's natural resources by avoiding development on and destruction of sensitive environmental areas. 
(3)  Promote economical and efficient use of land and reduce infrastructure cost through unified development. 
(4)  To provide amenities and enhancements that will sustain the quality of life and property values within the development as well as the properties surrounding the proposed PUD. 
(5)  Assure compatibility between proposed land uses within and around the PUD through appropriate development controls. 
(6)  Where appropriate, provide for community facilities, open space and recreational areas. 
(7)  To provide a maximum choice of business. and living environments by allowing for a variety of housing, building types and imaginative architectural design. 
(8)  To provide an opportunity for a mix of complementary uses otherwise not permitted within the standard zoning classifications. 
(9)  To develop land in an orderly, coordinated and comprehensive manner that is consistent with accepted land planning, landscape architecture practices and engineering principles. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  Planned Unit Development (PUD). A PUD is a zoning district where one use or a variety of uses may be accommodated. A PUD offers more flexible standards than those found in conventional zoning districts. 
(B)  Sub Area. A sub area is a defined use area within a PUD that is its own zoning district. Each Sub Area shall designate its specific use(s), as well as acreage, development standards, conceptual road alignments, gross densities, and other standards that may be required by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.03. - Amendments to planned unit developments. 
(A)  Existing Planned Unit Developments. Planned Unit Developments and all associated development plans and supporting documentation adopted prior to the effective date of these regulations shall continue in effect and be considered legally conforming under this code. The procedures for amendments of those developments must conform to the regulations indicated in this code. Zoning amendments passed during the time period granted for the approved development plan shall not in any way affect the terms under which approval of the PUD was granted. 
(B)  Changes to Development Plans. After City Council has approved a development plan, it may be amended only by the use of the same procedures as are applicable for the original adoption of a Planned Unit Development. However, minor technical adjustments to the development plan, resulting from field conditions, detailed engineering data, or topography, may be authorized in writing with the concurrence of the City Engineer and the City Planner. Such adjustment requests shall be supported by documentation. The City Engineer and the City Planner shall review the adjustment request and determine that it conforms to the original purpose and intent of the Planned Development approval. If the City Engineer and/or the City Planner do not agree with such adjustments, the adjustments shall not be allowed except by amendment. The Planning Commission shall be advised of all minor adjustments authorized. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.04. - Project ownership. 
The land proposed to be developed as a Planned Unit Development may be in single ownership, or if in multiple ownership all procedural application shall be filed jointly by all the owners of the properties included in the proposed development boundaries. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.05. - Provisions governing planned unit developments. 
Because of the special characteristics of planned unit developments, special provisions governing the development of land for this purpose are required. Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this chapter and those of the other chapters of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. The requirements of other applicable chapters of this Zoning Ordinance shall govern subjects not covered by this chapter. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.06. - Uses permitted and conditional. 
A Planned Unit Development may include any combination of uses when such use(s) are found to be compatible with one another and in keeping with the intent of the criteria, provided the proposed location of the uses will not adversely affect adjacent property and/or the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(A)  The list of specific uses to be included in the proposed Planned Unit Development shall be clearly stated; 
(B)  Uses shall be identified as either permitted uses or conditional uses; 
(C)  Listed uses shall be specifically defined using the most recent version of NAICS, unless they are defined by this Zoning Code; 
(D)  The Planning Commission may limit the location of any listed use because of compatibility or other constraints. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.07. - Common open space. 
The intent of the common open space is to provide space between or among buildings/structures for recreational purposes and/or aesthetic amenities. Public utility and similar easements and rights-of-way for water courses and other similar channels and detention and retention ponds are not acceptable for common open space unless such land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may require additional open space or amenities, recreational improvements or a combination thereof. 
The amount of common open space required shall be determined by (A) or (B) below, whichever is greater. 
(A)  Type of development. 
(1)  Residential development of 40 acres or more- a minimum of 10% of the land developed in any residential area of a PUD shall be reserved for common open space. 
(2)  Residential development of less than 40 acres- less than 10% of open space may be considered, based on the parcel's potential to meet the intent. 
(3)  Commercial/Industrial development- a minimum of 5% of the land developed in any commercial/industrial area of a PUD shall be reserved for common space. 
(4)  Mixed use developments- common open space shall be calculated using the requirements in numbers (1)-(3), based on the use of each sub area. 
(B)  Or by using the calculations set forth in Section 1107.16, Public Sites, Open Space, and Natural Features. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.08. - Disposition of open space. 
The common open space land shall be defined by legal instruments setting forth the ownership and perpetual maintenance of the required open space by the developer, home owner's association, condominium association or similar entity. Common open space for parks, recreation and related uses may, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, be dedicated to the City. All land dedicated to the City must meet the requirements as to size, shape and location as determined by the Planning Commission. The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer before approval of the Development Plan. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.09. - Procedure for approval of a PUD. 
The review of a PUD shall proceed sequentially through steps (A)-(D): 
(A)  Pre-application meeting required; 
(1)  The applicant shall provide an overview of the development and the advantages of developing the land as a PUD; 
(B)  Sketch Plan and information required in Section 1145.11; 
(1)  Public notification- Section 1145.12; 
(C)  Development Plan - Section 1145.14-1145.16; and 
(D)  Action by City Council- Section 1145.18 and 1145.19. 
Additional processes that shall occur after PUD Development Plan approval include: 
(A)  Preliminary and Final Plats per Section 1105. (if applicable) 
(B)  Design Review per Section 1144. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.10. - Preapplication meeting required. 
The applicant shall meet with the Director of Administration and/or his/her designated representative(s) prior to submitting the PUD sketch plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of these regulations and the criteria and standards contained therein; and to familiarize the developer with existing plans (i.e., comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan, etc.) the capital improvements program, the zoning regulations, the drainage, sewerage and water systems for the City and to become acquainted with the Planning Commission's requirements. At this meeting the applicant and the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative(s) shall discuss details regarding proposed streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other planned developments. The schedule of fees, as set forth in Chapter 1100 will also be discussed. 
(Ord. 23-12. Passed 2-23-2012.) 
Sec. 1145.11. - PUD sketch plan. 
Applications for review by the Planning Commission for PUD Sketch Plan: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(D)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(Ord. 39-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1145.12. - Filing of the sketch plan. 
The sketch plan shall be considered accepted after it is reviewed by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative and found to be complete. A filing fee shall be collected as indicated in Section 1113.05 at the time the application is provided to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. If the application is found to be incomplete the application and fee shall be returned to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.13. - Public notification. 
(A)  At least 10 calendar days before the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting regarding the Sketch Plan, the City Staff shall mail notifications to the adjacent property owners by mail of the proposed development. The notification shall include: 
(1)  The general concept of the proposed development. 
(2)  The location of the proposed development. 
(3)  The date, time and location of the Planning Commission meeting. 
(4)  A statement that this is early in the development process and citizen input is encouraged. 
Notice of the meeting shall also be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City at least seven days before the date of the meeting. The notice shall include the information set forth in subsections (1)-(4) above. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.14. - Planning Commission review of sketch plan. 
(A)  The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan and: 
(1)  Approve the sketch plan in principle; 
(2)  Approve in principle with modifications; 
(3)  Table the sketch plan allowing the developer an opportunity to return to the next regularly scheduled meeting or at a future regular meeting as requested by the developer, with a revised plan; or 
(4)  Reject the sketch plan. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.15. - Development plan required. 
(A)  After approval in principle of the Sketch Plan, an application for approval of the Development Plan shall be submitted to the City. 
(B)  Applications for review by the Planning Commission for Development Plan: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the City; 
(3)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(4)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. 
(C)  Sections 1137.09 through 1137.35 and 1144.09 through 1144.11 can be used as a guide to these requirements. 
(Ord. 40-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1145.16. - Filing of development plan. 
(A)  The development plan shall be considered accepted after it is reviewed by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative and found to be complete. A filing fee shall be collected, as indicated in Section 1113.05 at the time the application is provided to the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative. If the application is found to be incomplete the application and fee shall be returned to the applicant with an itemization of deficiencies. 
(B)  Once the application is reviewed and accepted by the Director of Administration or his/her designated representative, they shall place the Development Plan submittal on the next appropriate Planning Commission agenda. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.17. - Development plan approval. 
Within 60 days after accepted or within such further time frame as the applying party may agree to, the Planning Commission shall recommend that the Development Plan be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions, or disapproved. If disapproved, the reasons for a disapproving vote shall be stated by those members and it shall be captured in the minutes of the meeting. The Planning Commission shall then transmit the recommendation to City Council. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.18. - Criteria for recommendations by Planning Commission. 
(A)  Before making its recommendation as required in Section 1145.16, the Planning Commission shall find that the information submitted with the application establishes that: 
(1)  The development is capable of creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability, or that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained and the uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses; 
(2)  The streets and thoroughfares proposed and affected are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic for the development and any adjacent developments that will connect to the PUD. 
(3)  Undeveloped adjacent areas can be planned and zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development and the development will be reasonably compatible with adjacent developments. 
(4)  The planned unit development is in conformance with any and all City plans; 
(5)  The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and non-residential uses proposed. 
(6)  The written presentation submitted with the Sketch Plan, and any necessary revisions, is suitable and adequate. 
(7)  The proposed development meets the objectives set forth in Section 1145.01. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.19. - Action by Council. 
The number of copies of the Development Plan as determined by the Council Clerk shall be provided by the applicant for submission to City Council along with the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The applicant must also meet the requirements of Section 1131.08 through 1131.12. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.20. - Supplementary conditions. 
In approving any PUD, Council may require additional conditions. Violation of such conditions, when made a part of the terms under which the PUD is approved, shall be deemed a violation of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
Sec. 1145.21. - Variation from the approved development plan. 
All variations from the approved Preliminary Development Plan that relate to any of the criteria set forth in Section 1145.14, and including all use changes and all changes to development standards shall require the applicant amend the development plan (See Section 1145.03). 
(Ord. 17-10. Passed 5-27-2010.) 
CHAPTER 1147. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Cross reference- Mobile home subdivisions,  1111; mobile home dwelling defined,  1123.01(B)(35). 
State Law reference- Trailer parks, ORC Ch. 3733; definitions, ORC 4501.01(1), (K); tax levy on house trailers, ORC 4503.06 et seq. 

Sec. 1147.01. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the location of, and to encourage, stabilize and protect the development of well-planned mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1147.02. - Approval procedures. 
Mobile Home parks shall be permitted only as a Conditional Use in the R-5 District and shall be developed according to the general standards and regulations stated and referenced in this chapter. 
(Ord. 44-91. Passed 7-25-91.) 
Sec. 1147.03. - General standards for mobile home parks. 
(A)  The Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed or expanded mobile home park in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that the mobile home park development: 
(1)  Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area; 
(2)  Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses; 
(3)  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage, refuse disposal and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed park shall be able to provide adequately any such services; 
(4)  Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the comprehensive plan; 
(5)  Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads; 
(6)  Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural features of major importance; 
(7)  Minimum mobile home park shall not be less than five acres; 
(8)  Every mobile home must have skirting installed within ninety days after mobile home is placed on lot. Skirting shall be constructed of vinyl, aluminum or other suitable material that is designed specifically for skirting. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1147.04. - Incidental uses permitted. 
Uses incidental to the operation of a mobile home park are also permitted within the park. The uses include but are not limited to sales and service of new and used mobile homes and trailers and sales of parts. Intended incidental uses should be included in the proposal to the Board of Zoning Appeals when conditional use permits are requested to begin operation or expansion of a mobile home park. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1147.05. - Mobile home park requirements. 
Mobile home parks shall meet the requirements of Chapter HE-27 of the Ohio Sanitary Code adopted by the Public Health Council under the authority of ORC 3733.02. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1147.06. - Minimum floor area. 
Individual mobile homes located within a park shall have, using accepted industry standards, a minimum area of 600 square feet, except that within a mobile home park having ten or more individual lots occupied by mobile homes, up to ten percent of the lots may be occupied by mobile homes of less than 600 square feet. However, in no event shall the area of any mobile home be less than 400 square feet. However, a mobile home park existing at the time of the passage of this Zoning Ordinance may locate individual mobile homes of 400 square feet or more upon existing developed areas. The requirements of the first sentence of this section shall apply to all new mobile home parks and newly developed areas of existing mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
Sec. 1147.07. - Travel trailer. 
A travel trailer of any size may be kept in a mobile home park for not more than thirty days out of any one year. Such use on a lot shall be counted in determining the ten percent occupancy above provided for newly developed areas. 
(Ord. 1005-77. Passed 12-8-1977.) 
CHAPTER 1149. - FAMILY CARE AND GROUP HOMES[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Cross reference- Districts defined, Ch. 1135 
State Law reference- Rest homes, nursing homes health regulations, ORC Ch. 3721. 

Sec. 1149.01. - General. 
(A)  A family care home is allowed as a Permitted Use in districts R-4, and R-5 and is allowed as a Conditional Use in R-1, R-2, and R-3, but only after having complied with the approval of procedures relating to Conditional Uses specified in this Zoning Ordinance and the following conditions. 
(B)  Group Homes are allowed as a Conditional Use in R-3, R-4, and R-5 Districts, but only after having complied with the approval of procedures relating to Conditional Uses specified in this Zoning Ordinance and the following conditions. 
(Ord. 36-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1149.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  Family care home means a home licensed by the State which provides residential services and supervision for eight or fewer individuals who need not be related to the resident houseparents or supervisors, and who are developmentally disabled, mentally retarded, mentally ill, aged, handicapped or children in need of adult supervision. 
(B)  Group home means a home licensed by the State which provides residential services and supervision for more than eight but not more than sixteen individuals who need not be related to the resident houseparents or supervisors, and who are developmentally disabled, mentally retarded, mentally ill, aged, handicapped or children in need of adult supervision. 
(Ord. 36-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1149.03. - Building, fire, health and safety standards. 
Family care homes and group homes shall not maintain lower than the minimum building, fire, health and safety standards set by State and local laws and regulations applicable to such a home. No family care home or group home shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the Zoning Inspector. 
(Ord. 36-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1149.04. - Licensing. 
A family care home or group home shall not be permitted to be constructed or operated until the agency, organization or institution supervising such a home satisfies the Board of Zoning Appeals that the home and its operation comply or will, within a reasonable time, comply with all licensing requirements of the appropriate State agency. 
(Ord. 36-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
Sec. 1149.05. - Dispersal. 
(A)  Statement of Intent. In order to prevent the creation of a de facto social service district and to avoid impacting either a residential block or a neighborhood, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall exercise care in considering a request to establish a family care home which would increase the number of persons living in family care homes (and group homes in a multi-family district) on a block beyond sixteen persons (or beyond approximately one percent of the total number of persons, according to the most recent census figures, living within one-half mile of the applicant home). These provisions are intended to assure that family care homes or group homes do not exceed the limit capacity of a neighborhood's existing social structures to accommodate them. These provisions are also intended to avoid an over-concentration of family care homes and group homes which may inadvertently recreate an institutional setting, and thus impede successful functioning of such homes. 
(B)  Limitation of Homes on a Block. No more than one family care home or group home shall be permitted on the same block in a single-family district. 
(C)  Limitation of Homes in a Neighborhood. No family care home or group home shall be permitted if it is shown that such home would increase the number of persons living in such homes beyond one percent of the total number of persons, according to the most recent census figures, living within a radius of one-half mile of the applicant home. 
(Ord. 36-97. Passed 6-26-1997.) 
CHAPTER 1150. - ALTERNATIVE ENERGY 

Sec. 1150.01. - Purpose. 
To establish regulations for alternative energy in order to preserve and protect public health and safety and to permit residents and businesses of the City of Marysville to take advantage of alternative energy while maintaining the integrity of the Marysville Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. 30-11. Passed 8-25-2011.) 
Sec. 1150.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  Anemometer is an instrument that measures the force and direction of the wind. 
(B)  Clear Fall Zone means an area surrounding the wind turbine unit into which the turbine, tower and/or turbine components might fall due to inclement weather, poor maintenance, faulty construction methods, or any other condition causing turbine failure. The area shall remain confined within the property lines of the primary parcel where the turbine is located. The purpose of the zone being that if the turbine shall fall or otherwise become damaged, the falling structure will be confined to the primary parcel and will not intrude onto a neighboring property. 
(C)  Ground mounted means an alternative energy project which is not attached to a building and which is either attached directly to the ground or elevated on a supporting structure attached to the ground. 
(D)  Cowling means a streamlined removable cover that encloses the turbine's nacelle. 
(E)  Megawatt means a unit of power equal to one million watts. 
(F)  Monopole tower means a tower constructed of a single, self-supporting metal tube, anchored to a foundation. 
(G)  Nacelle sits atop the tower and contains the essential mechanical components of the turbine to which the rotor is attached. 
(H)  Owner means any of the following: 
(1)  Equipment owner means the person or entity that owns an alternative energy project. 
(2)  Participating owner means the owner of the property on which an alternative energy project is built. 
(3)  Non-participating landowner means an owner of property on which an alternative energy project is not being built. 
(I)  Roof/building mounted means an alternative energy project which is attached to a building or roof. 
(J)  Rotor diameter means the cross sectional dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades. 
(K)  Small wind energy project means a wind energy project that has a capacity of more than 2 kilowatts and less than 5 megawatts, including the wind turbine generator or anemometer or any parts thereof and is primarily used to generate energy for use on the property where it is located. Small wind energy projects shall include Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines (HAWTs), Vertical Axis Wind Turbines (VAWTs), and Blade Tip Power System (BTPSs) as shown in Figure 1. 
(L)  Solar energy system is a solar photovoltaic panel, solar hot air or hot water panel collector device, or other type of energy system which relies upon solar radiation as a source for the generation of electricity or transfer of stored heat. 
(M)  Total height means any of the following: 
(1)  Means for a horizontal and vertical axis turbine; the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. 
(2)  Means for a blade tip power system; the vertical distance from ground level to the highest point of the turbine structure. 
(N)  Wind energy project mean equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy (as defined by ORC 1551.20) and includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire or other component used in the project. 
(O)  Wind generator means the mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted at the top of a tower in a wind energy project. 
(P)  Zoning Inspector means the City of Marysville Zoning Inspector. 

Wind Turbine Configurations
(Ord. 30-11. Passed 8-25-2011; Ord. 59-13. Passed 12-19-2013.) 
Sec. 1150.03. - Small wind energy projects. 
Wind Energy Projects of 5MW or more shall be required to submit an application with the Ohio Power Siting Board (OPSB) at the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO) and are required to meet OPSB regulations. Any proposed construction, erection, or siting of a small wind project less than 5MW shall be a permitted use if the regulations in Sections 1150.04-1150.06 are met. 
(Ord. 30-11. Passed 8-25-2011.) 
Sec. 1150.04. - Standards-Small wind energy project. 
(A)  Small Wind Energy Projects are permitted in all zoning districts. 
(B)  Setbacks: 
(1)  Ground mounted. 
(a)  A distance equal to 1.1 times its total height from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted from the affected utility. 
(b)  A distance equal to 1.1 times its total height from all adjacent property lines. 
(c)  A distance equal to 1.1 times its total height from all road right-of-way lines. 
(d)  The owner shall provide for a "clear fall zone" that shall be maintained at all times the turbine or tower is standing. The "clear fall zone", along with the manufacturer's recommendations of such a zone must be attached to the engineering report submitted as part of the application. 
(e)  May be placed in the side and rear yards, but shall not be placed closer to the street than the front of the principal structure. 
(2)  Roof or building mounted. 
(a)  Total height of the wind energy project plus 10 feet. 
(b)  Shall be located on the rear half of the principal structure. 
(C)  Maximum Height: 
(1)  Ground mounted. 
(a)  AR, ER, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 OR, BR, B-1, B-3, NC and HMD: 50 feet. 
(b)  SD-1, TOC and GOV: 90 feet. 
(c)  M-1 and M-2: 150 feet. 
(2)  Roof or building mounted. 
(a)  Maximum permitted height of the principal building, plus 15 feet. 
(D)  Location. Small wind energy projects shall not be located or co-located on existing and/or future public and private utility structures including but not limited to cell towers, radio antennas, television antennas. 
(E)  Design. Small wind energy projects shall be designed in a manner that makes them as visually unobtrusive as possible, while meeting safety requirements. Towers and poles shall be monopole in design. Turbines, towers and poles shall be black, white, off-white or unpainted metal, unless colors are required by federal regulations. 
(F)  Lighting. Small wind energy projects shall not be illuminated except if required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Ohio Department of Transportation or other applicable authorities. The City Zoning Inspector may, however, approve lighting in other instances if it is determined that the proposed lighting will enhance the appearance of the small wind energy project and will not result in nuisances or hazards on nearby properties or streets. If lighting is required, a design that minimizes disturbances to nearby properties shall be utilized. 
(G)  Signs. No sign, other than a warning sign or installer, owner, participating landowner, or manufacturer identification sign, may be placed on any component of a small wind energy project. 
(H)  Signal Interference. The owner of a small wind energy project must take reasonable steps to prevent and eliminate any interference with the transmission and reception of electromagnetic communications, such as microwaves, radios, telephones, or television signals. 
(I)  Decibel Levels. Decibel levels shall not exceed those provided by the manufacturer. 
(J)  Wiring and Electrical Apparatuses. All wires and electrical apparatuses associated with the operation of a wind turbine unit shall be located underground, within the monopole or within the principal building and meet all applicable local, state and federal codes including the County Building Regulations and the Residential Building Code of Ohio. 
(K)  Utility Interconnection. A small wind energy project that connects to the electric utility must comply with all pertinent provisions of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. 30-11. Passed 8-25-2011.) 
Sec. 1150.05. - Permit requirements-Small wind energy projects. 
(A)  A zoning permit shall be required before construction can commence on an individual small wind energy project. The application for zoning permit: 
(1)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(2)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(3)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application; 
(4)  Shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within six (6) months or substantially completed within eighteen (18) months. 
(B)  As part of the permit process, the applicant shall inquire with the County and the City as to whether or not additional height restrictions are applicable due to the unit's location in relationship to the Union County Airport. 
(Ord. 41-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1150.06. - Maintenance-Small energy projects. 
(A)  Wind energy projects shall be maintained in good working order. A complete inspection of the system shall occur every two years at the cost of the owner. Inspections shall occur no later than September 30th of the required inspection calendar year and a copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the City by no later than October 31st of said inspection calendar year. 
(B)  The owner shall within 30 days of permanently ceasing operation of a small wind energy project, provide written notice of abandonment to the Zoning Inspector. 
(C)  A small wind energy project that is unused or out-of-service for a continuous 6 month period shall be deemed to have been abandoned. The Zoning Inspector may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the wind project that the project has been deemed to have been abandoned. The equipment owner shall have the right to respond to the Zoning Inspector's Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from the Notice date. The Zoning Inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the equipment owner that the Notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides verification that demonstrates that the wind project has not been abandoned. 
(D)  If the small wind energy project is determined to be abandoned or the Zoning Inspector receives a Notice of Abandonment from the equipment owner, the small wind project shall be removed within 90 days of the Notice of Abandonment and the site must be reclaimed. "Reclamation" includes removal of all equipment and apparatuses, supports and/or other hardware associated with the existing wind turbine, including removal of the above mentioned items to a depth of three (3) feet below grade if ground mounted. If the owner fails to remove a small wind energy project, the City may cause the removal of the structures at the expense of the permit holder or other responsible party. 
(Ord. 30-11. Passed 8-25-2011.) 
Sec. 1150.07. - Standards-Solar energy system. 
(A)  Permitted in all zoning districts. 
(B)  System shall be ground, roof or wall mounted. Only one type of mounting shall be permitted per lot. 
(C)  It is encouraged that the energy generated by a solar energy system is supplemental to the primary source. 
(D)  Location and/or setbacks. 
(1)  Ground mounted. 
(a)  Shall be located in the side or rear yard only and in accordance with the setbacks established for all accessory uses. In no instance shall the system be placed any closer to the street than the front of the main building on any lot. 
(b)  Any portion of the structure shall not exceed a maximum of 6 feet in height. 
(2)  Roof mounted. 
(a)  Shall be installed on the plane of the roof (flush mounted) or made part of the roof design and shall not extend above the ridgeline of the roof or extend beyond the existing roof width. In no instance shall the system extend greater than 18 inches from the roofs surface. 
(3)  Wall mounted. 
(a)  Shall be installed on the plane of the wall (flush mounted) or made part of the wall design. In no instance shall the system extend greater than 18 inches from the walls surface. 
(E)  Design. 
(1)  Ground mounted. 
(a)  All conduits, plumbing lines and related appurtenances shall be located underground. 
(b)  Excluding maximum lot coverage requirements per Section 1137, systems shall not cover more than 10% of the total lot area. 
(2)  Roof mounted. 
(a)  All exposed conduits, plumbing lines and related appurtenances shall be painted a color that closely matches the roof materials. 
(b)  May be placed on the main building and/or accessory building. 
(3)  Wall mounted. 
(a)  All exposed conduits, plumbing lines and related appurtenances shall be painted a color that closely matches the walls material. 
(b)  May be placed on the main building and/or accessory building. 
(c)  Shall not be visible from any street right-of-way. 
(F)  System shall comply with all applicable building, plumbing and electrical codes. 
(G)  System shall be placed so that the concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto other properties, roadways or airstrips in the vicinity. 
(H)  No signs, other than a warning sign or installer, owner, participating landowner, or manufacturer identification sign, may be placed on any component of a solar energy system. Maximum allowable signage to be determined by the Zoning Inspector. 
(I)  Systems shall be designed in a manner that makes them as visually unobtrusive as possible, while meeting all safety requirements. 
(Ord. 60-13. Passed 12-19-2013.) 
Sec. 1150.08. - Permit requirements-Solar energy system. 
A zoning permit shall be required before the installation of solar energy system. The application for zoning permit: 
(A)  Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City; 
(B)  Shall include all required supplemental information; 
(C)  Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application; 
(D)  Shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within six (6) months or substantially completed within eighteen (18) months. 
(Ord. 42-14. Passed 5-22-2014.) 
Sec. 1150.09. - Maintenance-Solar energy system. 
(A)  A solar energy system that is unused or out-of-service for a contiguous 6 month period shall be deemed to have been abandoned. The Zoning Inspector may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the system that the system has been deemed to have been abandoned. The system owner shall have the right to respond to the Zoning Inspector's Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from the Notice date. The Zoning Inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the equipment owner that the Notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides verification that demonstrates the system has not been abandoned. 
(B)  If the solar energy system is determined to have been abandoned or the Zoning Inspector receives a Notice of Abandonment from the system owner, the system shall be removed within 90 days of the Notice of Abandonment and the site must be reclaimed. "Reclamation" induces the removal of all equipment and apparatuses, supports and/or other hardware associated with the existing system, including removal of the above mentioned items to a depth of three (3) feet below grade if ground mounted. If the owner fails to remove a system, the City may cause the removal of the structures at the expense of the permit holder or other responsible party. 
(Ord. 60-13. Passed 12-19-2013.) 
Sec. 1150.10. - Exemptions. 
Systems used exclusively for traffic control signals or devices are exempt from Sections 1150.07-1150.09. 
(Ord. 60-13. Passed 12-19-2013.) 
PART THIRTEEN - BUILDING CODE 
CHAPTER 1301. - OHIO REVISED CODE BUILDING STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 47-18 ,  I(App. A), adopted July 9, 2018, amended Ch. 1301 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1301,  1301.01, pertained to Residential Code of Ohio, and derived from Ord. 91-06. Passed 11-19-2006. 
State Law reference- Marking flood areas, ORC 1521.14. 

Sec. 1301.01. - Adopted. 
Chapter 4101:1 of the Ohio Administrative Code and Chapters 3781 and 3791 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall apply and be enforced within the City of Marysville, Ohio. 
(Ord. 47-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
CHAPTER 1303. - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Dwelling House Code, Ch. 1301. 
State Law reference- Building standards, ORC Ch. 3781 et seq. 

Sec. 1303.01. - Building defined. 
(A)  Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
(ICC Code) 
(B)  Demolition. The act or process of removing, wrecking or destroying materials or structures. 
(Ord. 44-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
Sec. 1303.02 - Permit required; expiration; fee. 
(A)  No person shall demolish, remove from the premises, tear down or raze a building without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Division of Engineering. 
(B)  To obtain such a permit, the applicant shall first file with the Division of Engineering a statement showing the manner in which such building shall be razed, and, if the structure was built prior to 1980, the applicant shall also file an asbestos report by an Asbestos Hazard Evaluation Specialist certified by the Ohio Department of Health. All contractors are responsible to adhere to all EPA guidelines during demolition. Furthermore, prior to the permit being issued, the applicant must obtain approval from the Division of Public Service that the sewer and water lines servicing the property have been properly disconnected. If the demolition has no activity within one year of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire. 
(C)  The fee for the demolition permit (Residential/Commercial) shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) non-utility inspection permit and one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175.00) utility disconnect inspection permit. 
(D)  City of Marysville Historical District - All buildings located within the designated Historical District shall adhere to all guidelines for the Design Review Board and the Section 1136.13. 
(Ord. 44-16. Passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 50-17 . Passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 36-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 1303.03. - Conditions and regulations. 
(A)  Temporary Encroachments. Subject to the approval of the Division of Engineering, sidewalk sheds, underpinning and other temporary and protective guards and devices may project beyond the interior of the building and street lot lines as may be required to ensure the safety of the adjoining property owner and the public. When necessary, the consent of the adjoining property owner shall be obtained. 
(B)  Protection. All existing and adjoining public and private property shall be protected from damage incidental to demolition operations. Any use of explosives for demolition purposes is strictly prohibited within the City of Marysville. Material shall not be dropped by gravity or thrown outside the exterior walls of a building during demolition onto City property or adjoining property. Refuse containers shall be used for this purpose and any material which, in its removal, causes an excessive amount of dust, shall be wet down to prevent the creation of a nuisance. 
(C)  Grading of Lots . When a building has been demolished, the lot shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity with the established street grades at curb level, unless rebuilding operations are projected and approved. Wye poles are required for utility markings (if applicable). The lot shall be maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish and all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public. Provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on the premises or the adjoining property. If the owner elects to not fill the basement or excavation, he or she must provide necessary retaining walls and barriers, not less than six feet in height, which barriers shall be of such construction that will reasonably prevent accidental access to the excavation. 
(D)  Utility Connections. All service utility connections shall be discontinued and capped in accordance with the approved inspections and permit guidelines. 
(E)  Completion. Residential buildings shall be demolished within thirty (30) days of the beginning of the work. Commercial buildings shall be demolished within sixty (60) days of the beginning of the work. An extension may be granted by the Division of Engineering due to unforeseen circumstances, e.g. (Archaeology/Burial/Utilities/EPA). 
(Ord. 44-16. Passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 36-18 . Passed 5-14-2018.) 
Sec. 1303.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for each offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation or noncompliance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or noncompliance within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each ten days that a violation or noncompliance continues. The application of any penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. 44-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
CHAPTER 1305. - MOVING OF STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, ORC 715.20; power to license house movers, ORC 715.27(C). 

Sec. 1305.01. - Permit required. 
(A)  No person shall move or cause to be moved from one point to another within the Municipality, or to or from any point within the corporate limits, any building or structure without first obtaining from the Public Service Director a permit for such move. However, the Public Service Director may, by his/her discretion, waive this obligation provided that the move does not effect City utilities or City infrastructure which will need to be monitored in order for the move to take place. 
(B)  To obtain such permit the applicant shall first file with the Public Service Director a statement report showing the route over which the building or structure shall be moved and pay to the City of Marysville a permit fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) as well as costs (which shall be billed at an hourly rate) for any additional City services necessary to effect the move for issuing the permit. 
(Ord. 43-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
Sec. 1305.02. - Conditions and regulations. 
Upon compliance by the applicant with Section 1305.01 the Public Service Director shall investigate as to the probable interference with the public utilities, street and other railroad utilities and easements that may be affected and grant such permit upon such conditions and regulation as in the discretion of the Public Service Director to be just and equitable to protect the property rights of all parties interested. 
(Ord. 43-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
Sec. 1305.03. - Permission required for cutting of trees. 
No person engaged in the removal of any buildings or structures, shall cut or trim any trees or break or injure any branches thereof, without first obtaining the consent of the owner of the tree and for this purpose in the case of shade trees upon the street or sidewalk the owner of the lot where the trunk is located shall be deemed the owner thereof. All contractors must comply with Section 1140.07(D) of the Codified Ordinances regarding the replacement of any required landscaping. 
(Ord. 43-16. Passed 11-14-2016.) 
CHAPTER 1309. - ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 48-18 ,  I(App. A), adopted July 9, 2018, amended Ch. 1309 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1309,  1309.01-1309.04, 1309.99, pertained to numbering of structures, and derived from Ord. 1087-80. Passed 8-28-1980; Ord. 33-84. Passed 8-23-1984. 
State Law reference- Lot numbering and revision, ORC 711.02, 711.06, 711.28 et seq.; power to regulate building numbering, ORC 715.26. 

Sec. 1309.01. - Address identification. 
New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters (when applicable). Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be a minimum of four (4) inches. Where required by the Division of Fire and Division of Police, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public right-of-way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the address of the structure. All address identification characters and monument, poles or other approved signs shall be maintained so that the address identification is legible and visible. 
(Ord. 48-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 1309.02. - Numbering procedure. 
Streets crossing or terminating in Fifth Street shall be numbered north and south therefrom and streets crossing or terminating in Main Street shall be numbered east and west therefrom, and the streets not connecting with Fifth Street or Main Street shall be numbered as though the streets were extended to Fifth Street or Main Street. 
(Ord. 48-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 1309.03. - Adoption of schedule. 
The schedule of numbers, maps and plats relating thereto and now on file in the office of the Division of Engineering is contained as the official numbers for residential or commercial dwellings of the City of Marysville. The schedule of numbers, plats and maps is made a part of this Chapter, and the Division of Engineering when needed, shall cause detailed maps or other suitable records of residential or commercial dwellings or lot numbers to be prepared and kept on file in the Division of Engineering. 
(Ord. 48-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 1309.04. - Violations. 
The Division of Engineering, after being notified of noncompliance with this Chapter, shall cause notice to be sent, by certified mail, to the owner, occupant or person having control of the residential or commercial dwelling. No owner, occupant or person having control of a residential or commercial dwelling shall fail to correct such noncompliance within thirty days of receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. 48-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 1309.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 48-18 . Passed 7-9-2018) 
CHAPTER 1313. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Altering, polluting and diverting watercourse,  521.08. 
State Law reference- Flood control as function of Ohio Commission on Interstate Cooperation, ORC 105.36; flood control by soil conservation district supervisors, ORC 1515.08; flood insurance, ORC 3425.34(C), 3941.02(A)(1); water supply, sanitation, ditches, ORC 6101.01. 

Sec. 1313.01. - Statutory authorization. 
Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.02. - Findings of fact. 
The City of Marysville has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.03. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to: 
(A)  Protect human life and health; 
(B)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(C)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(D)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(E)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(F)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(G)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(H)  Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood prone areas; 
(I)  Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the floodplain are maintained; 
(J)  Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values of the floodplain; 
(K)  Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and 
(L)  Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.04. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(A)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(B)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(C)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(D)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other development which may increase flood damage; and, 
(E)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.05. - Lands to which these regulations apply. 
These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Marysville as identified in Section 1313.06, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.06. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted: 
(A)  Flood Insurance Study Union County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map Union County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both effective December 16, 2008. 
(B)  Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard. 
(C)  Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved by the City of Marysville as required by Section 1313.28 Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments. 
Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps and/or studies are on file at the City Engineer's Office, 125 East Sixth Street, Marysville, Ohio. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.07. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.08. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take precedence over these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.09. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the City of Marysville, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.10. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.11. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application. 
(A)  Accessory Structure means a structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
(B)  Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a variance. 
(C)  Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual flood or one-hundred (100) year flood. 
(D)  Base (100-Year) Flood Elevation (BFE) means the water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from 1 to 3 feet). 
(E)  Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(F)  Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
(G)  Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor. See Lowest Floor. 
(H)  Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management). Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
(I)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(J)  Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
(K)  Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(L)  Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas. 
(M)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard. 
(N)  Flood Insurance Risk Zones means zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone definitions: 
(1)  Zone A Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined. 
(2)  Zones A1-30 and Zone AE Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined. 
(3)  Zone AO Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are determined. 
(4)  Zone AH Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined. 
(5)  Zone A99 Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined. 
(6)  Zone B and Zone X (shaded) Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood. 
(7)  Zone C and Zone X (unshaded) Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain. 
(O)  Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
(P)  Flood Protection Elevation means the Flood Protection Elevation, or FPE, is the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the floodplain administrator. 
(Q)  Floodway means a floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community. 
The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces. 
(R)  Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed. 
(S)  Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or 
(3)  Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office. 
(4)  Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained by City of Marysville's historic preservation program, which program is certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office. 
(T)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis means an analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries. 
(U)  Letter of Map Change (LOMC) means a Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs are broken down into the following categories: 
(1)  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area. 
(3)  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies. 
(V)  Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an enclosure below the lowest floor which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor. 
(W)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle . For the purposes of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(X)  Manufactured home park means as specified in the Ohio Administrative Code 3701-27-01, a manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority. 
(Y)  National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means the NFIP is a Federal program enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas, the Federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss. 
(Z)  New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Marysville Flood Insurance Rate Map, April 2, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(AA)  Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in the Ohio Revised Code Section 111.15 as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution, state college or university, community college district, technical college district, or state community college. "Agency does not include the general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or any court. 
(BB)  Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis, (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(CC)  Registered Professional Architect means a person registered to engage in the practice of architecture under the provisions of sections 4703.01 to 4703.19 of the Revised Code. 
(DD)  Registered Professional Engineer means a person registered as a professional engineer under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code. 
(EE)  Registered Professional Surveyor means a person registered as a professional surveyor under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code. 
(FF)  Special Flood Hazard Area is also known as "Areas of Special Flood Hazard", it is the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated with a watercourse. 
(GG)  Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building. 
(HH)  Structure means a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
(II)  Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(JJ)  Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction, 
(2)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(3)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure . 
(KK)  Variance means a grant of relief from the standards of these regulations consistent with the variance conditions herein. 
(LL)  Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.12. - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.13. - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard areas. 
(2)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood protection elevation information. 
(3)  Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance. 
(4)  Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of these regulations have been committed. 
(5)  Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations. 
(6)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
(7)  Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during variance hearings. 
(8)  Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up. 
(9)  Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.14. - Floodplain development permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other development activity including but not limited to filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in Section 1313.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the requirements of these regulations have been met. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.15. - Application required. 
An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
(B)  Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are proposed. 
(C)  Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
(D)  Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement of these regulations. 
(E)  Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a floodplain development permit when applicable: 
(1)  Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed structure as required in Section 1313.30. 
(2)  Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure not meeting the design requirements of Section 1313.20(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces. 
(3)  Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and maintenance assurances as required in Section 1313.34(C). 
(4)  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood elevations but no floodway as required by Section 1313.34(B). 
(5)  A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by Section 1313.34(A). 
(6)  Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-scale developments as required by Section 1313.28. 
(7)  Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage has been provided as required by Section 1313.34(D). 
(F)  A floodplain development permit application fee set by the schedule of fees adopted by the City of Marysville. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.16. - Review and approval of a Floodplain Development Permit application. 
(A)  After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application shall be reviewed until all information required in Section 1313.15 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. 
(B)  Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one (1) year. A floodplain development permit shall expire one (1) year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.17. - Inspections. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.18. - Post-construction certifications required. 
The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been issued: 
(A)  For new or substantially improved residential structures, or nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative. 
(B)  For all development activities subject to the standards of Section 1313.21(A), a Letter of Map Revision. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.19. - Revoking a floodplain development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with Sections 1313.36-1313.41 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.20. - Exemption from filing a development permit. 
An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be required for: 
(A)  Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than $5,000.00. 
(B)  Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code Section 3701. 
(C)  Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board under Section 4906 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(D)  Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous Waste Siting Board under Section 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(E)  Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988-Floodplain Management. 
Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.21. - Map maintenance activities. 
To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that Marysville's flood maps, studies and other data identified in Section 1313.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities are identified: 
(A)  Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
(1)  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include: 
(a)  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
(b)  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
(c)  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
(d)  Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Section 1313.28. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with Section 1313.21(A), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
(a)  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
(b)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
(4)  Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to Section 1313.21(A)(1). 
(B)  Right to Submit New Technical Data. The Floodplain Administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of City of Marysville, and may be submitted at any time. 
(C)  Annexation/Detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the City of Marysville have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the Marysville's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City of Marysville boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the City of Marysville suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the City of Marysville has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.22. - Data use and flood map interpretation. 
The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard: 
(A)  In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source. 
(B)  Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(C)  When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance Study have been provided by FEMA: 
(1)  Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(D)  The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 1313.36-1313.41, Appeals and Variances. 
(E)  Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water marks, etc.) shall prevail. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.23. - Substantial damage determinations. 
Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(A)  Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood hazard areas; 
(B)  Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures located in special flood hazard areas; and 
(C)  Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.24. - Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction. 
The following use and development standards apply to development wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as established in Section 1313.06 or 1313.22(A). 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.25. - Permitted uses. 
All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by City of Marysville are allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.26. - Prohibited uses. 
(A)  Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, permitted under Section 3701 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(B)  Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard areas, permitted under Section 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(C)  New construction of any residential or nonresidential structures in floodway areas, excluding accessory structures of 600 square feet or less constructed per standards of 1313.31 below. 
(D)  Storage or processing of materials that are hazardous, flammable, or explosive in the identified special flood hazard area. 
(E)  Storage of material or equipment that, in time of flooding, could become buoyant and pose an obstruction to flow in identified floodway areas. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.27. - Water and wastewater systems. 
The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code: 
(A)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
(B)  New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(C)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.28. - Subdivisions and large developments. 
(A)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations; 
(B)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(C)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
(D)  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all major (platted) subdivisions proposals, and other proposed developments at least 5 acres in size. 
(E)  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in Section 1313.21(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by Section 1313.28(D). 
(F)  All preliminary plans for platted subdivisions shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(G)  All final subdivision plats will provide the boundary of the special flood hazard area, the floodway boundary, and base flood elevations. 
(H)  In platted subdivisions, all proposed lots or parcels that will be future building sites shall have a minimum buildable area outside the natural (non-filled) 1% chance annual floodplain. The buildable area shall be large enough to accommodate any primary structure and associated structures such as sheds, barns, swimming pools, detached garages, on-site sewage disposal systems, and water supply wells, if applicable. 
(I)  Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision, which would be subject to flooding. All street surfaces must be located at or above the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.29. - Residential structures. 
(A)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (1313.29(A)) and construction materials resistant to flood damage (1313.29(B)) are satisfied. 
(B)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
(C)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(D)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where no flood protection elevation data is available, the structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade. Support structures and other foundation members shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as designed in accordance with ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction. 
(E)  New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following standards: 
(1)  Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage; and 
(2)  Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or 
(3)  Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(F)  Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(G)  Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt from the development standards of Section 1313.29. 
(H)  In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
(I)  Each new residential site shall have direct access to a walkway, driveway, or roadway whose surface elevation is not less than the flood protection elevation and such escape route shall lead directly out of the floodplain area. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.30. - Nonresidential structures. 
(A)  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of Section 1313.29 (A)-(C) and (E)-(G). 
(B)  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet all of the following standards: 
(1)  Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood protection elevation; 
(2)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and, 
(3)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with Section 1313.30((B) (1) and (2). 
(C)  Where no flood protection elevation data is available, the structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade. 
(D)  Each nonresidential site shall have direct access to a walkway, driveway, or roadway whose surface elevation is not less than the flood protection elevation and such escape route shall lead directly out of the floodplain area. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.31. - Accessory structures. 
Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards: 
(A)  They shall not be used for human habitation; 
(B)  They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials; 
(C)  They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(D)  They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation; 
(E)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection elevation; and 
(F)  They shall meet the opening requirements of Section 1313.29(E)(3). 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.32. - Recreational vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards: 
(A)  They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for more than 180 days, 
(B)  They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
(C)  They must meet all standards of Section 1313.29. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.33. - Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. 
All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.34. - Assurance of flood carrying capacity. 
Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized: 
(A)  Development in Floodways. 
(1)  In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant: 
(a)  Meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section 1313.21(A). 
(b)  An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; 
(c)  Certification that no structures are located in areas that would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation; 
(d)  Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the proposed action on their property; and 
(e)  Concurrence of the Mayor of City of Marysville and the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions. 
(B)  Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No Floodways. 
(1)  In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.0 (one) foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that this standard has been met; or, 
(2)  Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant: 
(a)  An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; 
(b)  Section 1313.34(A)(2), items (a) and (c)-(e). 
(C)  Alterations of a Watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the "bankfull stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a Federal, State, or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following standards apply: 
(1)  The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. 
(2)  Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with City of Marysville specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit. 
(4)  The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section 1313.21(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts. 
(D)  Compensatory Storage Required for Fill. Development within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to development shall be offset by providing an equal or greater volume of permanent flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the development site. This compensatory floodplain storage shall be proposed and created in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a Stormwater Management Permit, a plan and calculations prepared by a professional engineer shall be submitted for approval. This plan shall be based on a field survey, shall show the existing and proposed grades of the development and compensatory storage areas, and shall be accompanied by calculations which demonstrate that the proposed stage vs. storage volume relationship of the compensatory storage area would have the same or greater storage volume at each stage as in the pre-development condition of the proposed development area. 
(2)  The compensatory storage area shall have a hydraulic connection to the affected watercourse which is equal to or greater than the pre-development conditions and shall provide the same or improved rate of flood storage capture and discharge over the course of the flood event as in the pre-development conditions. 
(3)  Compensatory storage shall be located adjacent to the development area or on the opposite side of the stream across from the development area. In the case of filling for a new stream crossing, the compensatory storage shall be located upstream of the crossing. 
(4)  The compensatory storage area shall be a permanent component of the property, and shall be repaired or replaced by the owner of the property if silted-in or otherwise compromised by activities other than natural movement of the stream. 
(5)  Where the applicant proposes compensatory storage on property owned by others, the applicant shall submit a written agreement between such landowner and the applicant wherein the landowner agrees to convey an easement or other property interest or right to the applicant allowing compensatory storage, and to permanently maintain such area for flood storage purposes, as described in (4), above. 
(6)  The design and creation of the development and compensatory storage areas shall incorporate best management practices as required by other City of Marysville regulations or state or federal agencies to minimize soil erosion and sediment impacts. 
(7)  Prior to grading or construction in development and compensatory storage areas, the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary permits or approvals from other involved agencies such as the Army Corps of Engineers and the Ohio EPA. 
(8)  Prior to grading or construction in development and compensatory storage areas, the applicant shall submit technical data regarding the proposed flood boundary revision to FEMA and obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) in accordance with Section 1313.21(A) of these regulations. 
(9)  After the development and compensatory storage areas are complete, an as-built topographic survey of the development area and the compensatory storage area shall be prepared and stamped by a professional surveyor and submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. This survey shall be accompanied by as-built stage vs. storage volume calculations prepared by a professional engineer as described in (1), above. 
(10)  After the development and compensatory storage areas are satisfactorily complete, the applicant shall submit technical data to and obtain a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA in accordance with Section 1313.21(A) of these regulations. When the development and compensatory storage areas are created for a new subdivision development, the Letter of Map Revision shall be obtained prior to the City of Marysville approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.35. - Fill. 
The following standards apply to all fill activities in special flood hazard areas: 
(A)  Fill sites, upon which structures will be constructed or placed, must be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard Proctor Test method or an acceptable equivalent method, 
(B)  Fill slopes shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, 
(C)  Adequate protection against erosion and scour is provided for fill slopes. When expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of five feet per second armoring with stone or rock protection shall be provided. When expected velocities during the base flood are five feet per second or less protection shall be provided by covering them with vegetative cover. 
(D)  Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.36. - Appeals Board established. 
(A)  The City of Marysville Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby appointed to serve as the Appeals Board for these regulations as established by City Code. 
(B)  Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in City Hall 125 East Sixth Street Marysville, Ohio. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.37. - Powers and duties. 
(A)  The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these regulations. 
(B)  Authorize variances in accordance with Section 1313.39 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.38. - Appeals. 
(A)  Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file, within 14 business days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to the Appeals Board. 
(B)  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.39. - Variances. 
Any person believing that the use and development standards of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(A)  Application for a Variance. 
(1)  Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to the Appeals Board. 
(2)  Such application at a minimum shall contain the following information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the variance sought; and reason for the variance request. 
(3)  All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city of Marysville. 
(B)  Public Hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of these regulations and the following factors: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(5)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage. 
(6)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(C)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws. 
(4)  A determination that the structure or other development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages. 
(5)  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
(D)  Other Conditions for Variances. 
(1)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(2)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in Section 1313.39(B)(1)-(11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.40. - Procedure at hearings. 
(A)  All testimony shall be given under oath. 
(B)  A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses. 
(C)  The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in support of the appeal or variance. 
(D)  The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to the appeal or variance. 
(E)  All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse party or their counsel. 
(F)  Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part of the record for appeal. 
(G)  The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and service shall be collected in advance. 
(H)  The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable time after the hearing. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.41. - Appeal to the court. 
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such decision to the Union County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.42. - Compliance required. 
(A)  No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in Section 1313.20. 
(B)  Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1313.99. 
(C)  Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in accordance with Section 1313.99. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.43. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall: 
(A)  Be put in writing on an appropriate form; 
(B)  Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations; 
(C)  Specify a reasonable time for performance; 
(D)  Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal; 
(E)  Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
Sec. 1313.99. - Violations and penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City of Marysville. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Marysville from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The City of Marysville shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein. 
(Ord. 46-08. Passed 11-6-2008.) 
CHAPTER 1319. - EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Registration of abandoned properties, Ch. 1320. 

Sec. 1319.01. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City by preventing property deterioration and by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and conditions of all residential and non-residential premises; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and occupants; and to fix penalties for violations of this Chapter. This Chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013.) 
Sec. 1319.02. - Definitions. 
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter shall have the respective meaning assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(A)  Accessory structure. A detached building or structure in a secondary or subordinate capacity from the main building. 
(B)  Approved. Approval by the designated City official. 
(C)  Approved area. Shall be the area adjacent to the street curb designated for bulk item pick-up. In no instance shall bulk items obstruct the pedestrian or vehicular right-of-ways. 
(D)  Blight. Something that impairs or destroys; a deteriorated condition (urban blight). 
(E)  Building. A combination of materials enclosed within walls or designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, business, institutions, animals or property of any kind. 
(F)  Building code. The Building Code as adopted by the Council of the City of Marysville by virtue of Ordinance 57-96. 
(G)  Bulk items. Any discarded item(s) not able to fit into designated garbage and recycling containers. 
(I)  Deterioration. The condition or appearance of a building or structure or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect or lack of maintenance. 
(J)  Dwelling. Any structure designed for use by human occupants for sleeping and living purposes, whether occupied or vacant. 
(K)  Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(L)  Exposed to public view. Any premises, or any part thereof, or any building or any part, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, open-air parking lot, or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
(M)  Exterior of premises. All areas of the lot which are exposed to public view. 
(N)  Exterior of structure. The portions of a building which are exposed to public view. 
(O)  Fire hazard. Any thing or act which increases or may cause any increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or that which may obstruct, delay or hinder or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay or hindrance or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay, hazard or hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire. 
(P)  Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
(Q)  Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
(R)  Household furnishings. Furniture, fixtures, and similar items intended for indoor use. 
(R.1)  Infestation. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard. 
(S)  Immediate neighborhood. An area separated by no appreciable space and specially denoting a limited number of properties in a very close space relationship to each other. 
(T)  Mixed occupancy. Any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to non-dwelling uses. 
(U)  Natural growth. Dead trees and limbs or other natural growth that, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(V)  Nuisance. Means any of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the Statutes of Ohio or the Ordinances of the City of Marysville. 
(2)  Conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist and where the conditions are perilous by active and negligent operation thereof. 
(3)  Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health, in violation of this Chapter. 
(4)  Fire hazards. 
(W)  Occupant. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, structure, dwelling or premises (or a part thereof), whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
(X)  Over hangings. Loose and overhanging objects that, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(Y)  Owner. The owner or owners of the premises including the holder of title thereto subject to contact of purchase, a vendee in possession, a mortgagee or receiver in possession, lessee or joint lessees of the whole thereof, or an agent, or any other person, firm, corporation or fiduciary directly in control of the premises. 
(Z)  Person. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
(AA)  Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
(BB)  Recreational Vehicle shall include, but is not limited to the following: travel trailer, pick-up camper, motor home, folding tent trailer, boat, boat trailer, antique motor vehicle, licensed private trailer, and other equipment not suited for normal, everyday travel. 
(CC)  Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes; an accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps and roots that present a safety hazard, and includes garbage, trash and debris which present an unsanitary and/or safety hazard. 
(DD)  Registered mail. Registered or certified mail. 
(EE)  Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available for rent for sleeping purposes with or without cooking facilities. 
(FF)  Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials; except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
(GG)  Setback line. A line established by the Zoning Ordinance generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building, other than accessory building, or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in such Zoning Ordinance. 
(HH)  Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
(II)  Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
(JJ)  Undeveloped. Lot or parcel of land that has not been built on or used for commercial, industrial, or residential purposes. 
(KK)  Weathering. Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
(LL)  Weeds as used in this chapter, include, but are not limited to, the following: any brush, and all briars, thistles, burdock, dock, cocklebur, wild mustard, dog's fennel, lamb's quarters, plantain, wild carrot, wild parsnip, horseweed, white or yellow sweet clover, velvet leaf, common mallow, iron weed, poison ivy, and teasel. In addition, grass at a height of (9) inches or more shall be deemed "weeds" under this definition, as shall vegetation constituting a threat to the public health, security, or welfare. 
(MM)  Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
(NN)  Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013; Ord. 21-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 1319.03. - Applicability. 
(A)  Every building and the premises on which it is situated in the City shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter, whether or not such building has been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this Chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this Chapter. This Chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building. 
(B)  In any case, where the provisions of this Chapter impose a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the City or under the laws of the State, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this Chapter impose a lower standard than any other ordinances of the City or of the laws of the State, then the higher standard contained in any such ordinance or law shall prevail. 
(C)  After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this Chapter as well as compliance with the ordinances under which such licenses and permits are granted. 
(D)  No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this Chapter shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the City applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner or occupant from complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the City from enforcing any such other provision. 
(E)  This Chapter only pertains to violations visible from any public right-of-way, including but not limited to, alleys, sidewalks and streets and/or from adjoining, separately-owned properties. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013.) 
Sec. 1319.04. - Administrative and enforcement. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Marysville. 
(2)  The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
(3)  The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
(B)  Inspections. 
(1)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency. 
(2)  Inspections are conducted from any public right-of-way or from adjoining, separately owned properties. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Officer can view violations from adjoining private properties with permission granted from the property owner or legal occupant of the property. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013; Ord. 21-17 . Passed 4-10-2017) 
Sec. 1319.05. - Notices and orders; method of service. 
When a violation of this Chapter or the regulations hereunder are found to exist, a written notice and/or order, as provided below, from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be served upon the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. 
(A)  Contents of Notice or Order. 
(1)  A notice shall specify; person(s) responsible, address of property in violation, violation(s) identified, steps required to be taken to correct or abate violation(s), a reasonable period of time (not to exceed forty-five (45) days) to correct or abate violation(s) 
(2)  An order shall specify; person(s) responsible, address of property in violation, violation(s) identified with the code sections, steps required to be taken to correct or abate violation(s), a reasonable period of time) not to exceed forty-five (45) days) to correct or abate violation(s), owners right to an appeal and legal action by the City for failure to comply. 
(B)  Service. 
(1)  Such notice or order shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is; 
(a)  Delivered personally; 
(b)  Sent first-class or certified mail to the last know address; 
(c)  Served to the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure or premises; or 
(d)  Posted in a conspicuous place on the structure or premises affected by such notice. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013.) 
Sec. 1319.06. - Owners duties and responsibilities. 
(A)  Owners shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in this Chapter and the regulations as described herein, and no owner shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility, nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefore and in violation thereof. 
(B)  Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this Chapter, the respective obligations and responsibilities of the owner and the occupant shall not be altered or affected by an agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and any other parties. 
(C)  The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisance and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, pedestrians, and other persons utilizing the premises; and free of unsanitary conditions; and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner. It shall be the duty of the owner to keep the premises free of hazards. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013.) 
Sec. 1319.07. - Exterior appearance of premises. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  All residential or non-residential exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
(B)  Rubbish and Garbage. 
(1)  All exterior property and premises shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(2)  Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(a)  All designated garbage and recycling containers may be stored in an approved area for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours beginning at 7:00 p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled pick-up date by the refuse contractor. 
(b)  All discarded bulk items shall be placed in an approved area for pick-up for a period not to exceed seven (7) days; otherwise, the City shall cause such items to be removed in accordance with these regulations and assess the costs thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land. Notice shall be served in accordance with Section 1319.05(B) at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the City removing such item(s). 
(c)  All discarded bulk items located on commercial or multi-family properties shall be stored inside the designated refuse enclosure; otherwise, the City shall cause such items to be removed in accordance with these regulations and assess the costs thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land. 
(C)  Exterior Storage. 
(1)  No front yard shall be used for the storage of any materials, equipment or domestic supplies: unless further regulated by this section, when it is necessary to store materials on the exterior, the materials shall be stored neatly in side or rear yards. 
(2)  Automotive parts, accessories or equipment shall only be stored inside a completely enclosed structure. 
(3)  All building materials and construction equipment shall only be stored inside a completely enclosed structure; the only exception is a construction site with active permits. 
(4)  All discarded household furniture, appliances or disassembled materials shall only be stored inside a completely enclosed structure until they are disposed of properly. 
(D)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Lawns must be established in areas surrounding the residence or building or any areas not covered by landscaping, driveways, and parking areas in order to prevent erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon. 
(2)  Hedges and bushes shall be kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view, and where same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property. 
(3)  The owner of every lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits upon which a tree, plant or shrubbery stands with any part thereof upon or overhanging a public street or sidewalk shall conform to the regulations herein provided; otherwise, the Municipality shall cause such tree, plant or shrubbery to be trimmed or cut down and removed in accordance with such lot or parcel of land. 
(a)  Such owner shall trim or cause such tree, plant or shrubbery to be trimmed so that a clear height of eight feet between the lowest branches of the same and the street or sidewalk is maintained. 
(b)  Such owner shall trim or remove, as the case may require, every dead, decayed or broken tree, plant or shrubbery, or part thereof, so the same shall not fall to the street or sidewalk. 
(c)  Such owner shall cut down and remove any tree, plant or shrubbery, or any part thereof, as may be necessary to provide a clear and unobstructed view of traffic from all directions at any street intersection, or to abate any nuisance necessary to protect life, limb or property of persons, drivers of any vehicles or pedestrians using such street or sidewalk. 
(E)  Removal of Tall Grass and Weeds. 
(1)  The owner of any lot or parcel of land greater than one (1) acre shall, within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of any adjacent developed lot or parcel and/ or street right-of-way, cut or destroy or cause to be cut or destroyed, any grass, noxious or poisonous weeds or vines growing upon any such lot or parcel of land and prevent the same from blowing or going to seed or exceeding a height of nine (9) inches. However, all lots or lands of one (1) acre or less shall be kept mowed in their entirety by the owner so as to prevent the same from blowing or going to seed or exceeding a height of nine (9) inches; otherwise, the City shall cause such grass, weeds or vines to be cut down and/or removed in accordance with these regulations and assess the costs thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land 
(2)  The owner of any undeveloped lot or parcel of land greater than one (1) acre within the corporate limits shall cause such lot(s) to be cut in its entirety no less than three (3) times annually during the period from April 1 through November 15. The first such cut shall occur during the months of April or May. The second such cut shall occur during the months of June, July, or August. The third such cut shall occur during the months of September, October, or November; otherwise, the City shall cause such grass, weeds, or vines to be cut down and/or removed in accordance with these regulations and assess the costs thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land. 
(F)  Accessory Structures. 
(1)  All accessory structures including, but not limited to; detached garages, fences, sheds, barns, gazebos, and retaining walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(G)  Signs and Billboards. 
(1)  All signs and billboards permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely maintained or, where no longer in use, completely removed. 
(H)  Infestation. 
(1)  All exterior premises shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation by insects or termites. 
(I)  Parking and Storage of Motor Vehicles. 
(1)  The parking of any motor vehicle is not permitted in the front yard of any residential dwelling with the exception of the designated driveway located from the street to the primary structure or garage of a property. 
(2)  The parking or storage, within any district, of motor vehicles without current license plates shall be prohibited, unless such vehicle is stored in a completely enclosed structure. 
(3)  The parking or storage, within any district, of a disabled motor vehicle shall be prohibited, unless such vehicle is stored in a completely enclosed structure. 
(4)  The parking or storage, within any district, of a junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicle or parts thereof shall be prohibited, unless such vehicle is stored in a completely enclosed structure. For the purposes of this section, a junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicle shall be one which is damaged, or no longer serviceable, to the extent that it is inoperable or is unsafe to operate upon the public streets or highways. 
(5)  This section shall not apply to properly licensed junkyards, motor vehicle salvage facilities and motor vehicle dealers, which are regulated by appropriate sections of the Ohio Revised Code or other Chapters of the City's Ordinances. 
(J)  Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles. 
(1)  No more than two recreational vehicles with current license plates, not in violation of Section 1319.07(I), shall be stored or parked outdoors. These vehicles shall be parked or stored behind the front setback line. Vehicles may be parked in front of the front setback line for loading or unloading purposes for a period of time not greater than forty-eight (48) hours in any thirty (30) day period without permission of the Code Enforcement Officer. Recreational vehicles shall not block any public sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013; Ord. 21-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
Sec. 1319.08. - Exterior appearance of structures. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  All residential or non-residential property exteriors of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Exterior Structures. 
(1)  The following conditions shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the Ohio Building Code, Union County Building Codes and other Chapters within the City's Ordinances; 
(a)  Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter or windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight. 
(b)  Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or damage. 
(c)  Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials. 
(d)  Exterior walls that are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials. 
(e)  The roof and roofing components including, but not limited to, flashing, drains, gutters and downspouts that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration. 
(f)  Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored, or any portion thereof that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration. 
(g)  Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored, or any portion thereof that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration. 
(h)  Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies, handrails and all similar appurtenances attached thereto are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration. 
(i)  Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound, not properly anchored, or not in good repair with signs of deterioration. 
(j)  Doors and windows shall be maintained in good repair. All glazing materials shall be in good condition, free from cracks and holes. 
(C)  Protective Treatment. 
(1)  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective coverings or treatment. 
(3)  Peeling, flaking or chipping paint shall be eliminated and surfaces properly protected. 
(4)  All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be properly protected to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013.) 
Sec. 1319.09. - Appeals; exterior property maintenance commission. 
(A)  Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, notice or order under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Exterior Property Maintenance Commission, providing that a written application for appeal is filed with the City's Clerk of Council within (20) days from the date of the notice or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(B)  The Exterior Property Maintenance Commission shall consist of five Marysville citizens not employed by the City; one appointed by the Administration and one from each ward of the City appointed by their respective Ward Council persons. Members shall serve a three-year term and no more than two consecutive terms. 
(C)  The Exterior Property Maintenance Commission shall also be responsible for administering the Connie Patterson Beautification Program and any other City sponsored beautification project or contest. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013; Ord. 46-15. Passed 12-3-2015.) 
Sec. 1319.99. - Penalty. 
Any owner(s) of a property who fails to comply with any provision(s) of this Chapter shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and fined as follows; 
(A)  First offense: Not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(B)  Second or subsequent similar offenses within one calendar year: Not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(C)  Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(D)  Each day's failure to comply with any section of this Chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 38-13. Passed 11-7-2013; Ord. 21-17 . Passed 4-10-2017.) 
CHAPTER 1320. - VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Exterior Property Maintenance Code, Ch. 1319. 

Sec. 1320.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for identifying and registering vacant buildings. This regulation is to be used as a tool to protect and preserve our neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security concerns at vacant structures. The City of Marysville believes the presence of vacant buildings can lead to neighborhood decline, create public nuisances, contribute to lower property values, and discourage potential buyers from purchasing a home or business in neighborhoods with vacant properties. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.02. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
(A)  Accessible property means a property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall, or other opening providing access. 
(B)  Accessible structure means a house, building or other structure that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
(C)  Buyer means any person, partnership, co-partnership, association and corporation, fiduciary or other entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property. 
(D)  Deed in lieu of foreclosure means a recorded document that transfers ownership from a property from the mortgagor to the mortgagee. 
(E)  Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or conditional. 
(F)  Distressed means a property that is the subject of a pending foreclosure suit, has been foreclosed upon by the foreclosing entity, is set for sheriff's sale, has been sold at sheriff's sale or has been conveyed to the mortgagee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(G)  Foreclosing entity means an entity holding a note secured by a mortgage, an entity holding a lien recorded with Union County Recorder's Office a non-government entity that holds an interest in delinquent property taxes, an entity that takes property via a deed in lieu of foreclosure, an entity that has purchased a property from a sheriff's sale, a government entity that accepts property as a result of a government insured mortgage or loan. 
(H)  Foreclosure means the process by which a foreclosing entity seeks a decree of foreclosure from the Union County Common Pleas Court. 
(I)  Mortgage means an agreement between a mortgagor and a mortgagee by which a mortgagee retains an interest in real estate title as collateral for a loan. This definition applies to any and all subsequent mortgages, (i.e., second mortgage, third mortgage, etc.) 
(J)  Mortgagee means the person, partnership, co-partnership, association, corporation, lender, fiduciary or any other entity holding a mortgage on a property. 
(K)  Mortgagor means a borrower under a mortgage. 
(L)  Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
(M)  Property means any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the City including any house, building or other structures that may be located on the property regardless of condition. 
(N)  Securing means such measures as may be directed by the Code Enforcement Officer that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repair or replacement of doors, windows or other openings. 
(O)  Vacant means a house, building or other structure shall be deemed to be vacant if no person or persons actually or currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s) or tenant(s). 
(1)  A building shall be deemed vacant if it is: 
(a)  Unoccupied and unsecured; 
(b)  Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means; 
(c)  Unoccupied and an unsafe building as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer; 
(d)  Unoccupied and having utilities disconnected; 
(e)  Unoccupied and has property maintenance violations; 
(f)  Illegally occupied which shall include loitering and vagrancy; 
(g)  Unoccupied for a period of time over ninety (90) days and having an existing code violation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer; 
(h)  Unoccupied with a mortgage status of abandonment (i.e., deceased or foreclosed); 
(i)  Unoccupied and abandoned by the property owner; or 
(j)  Has not been used for its intended purpose for more than 180 days. 
(P)  Secured by other than normal means. A building secured by means other than those used in the design of a building. 
(Q)  Unoccupied. A building which is not being used for the occupancy authorized by the owner. The term unoccupied shall only be applicable to multi-unit structuers when more than half (1/2) of the units and/or more than half (1/2) of the available space are not currently occupied by a tenant or tenants. 
(R)  Unsecured. A building or portion of a building which is open to entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders. 
(S)  Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to; signficantly below standard utility usage, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, graffiti or other defacement of buildings or structures, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, accumulation of trash, junk, and/or debris, broken or boarded up windows, abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials, the absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupation, statement(s) by governmental employee(s) that the property is vacant. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.03. - Registration requirements. 
(A)  The owner shall register with the City of Marysville Code Enforcement Officer not later than ninety (90) days after any building is located in an area zoned for, or abutting an area zoned for, residential or commercial use in the City becomes a vacant building or not later than thirty (30) days of being notified by the Code Enforcement Officer of the requirement to register based on evidence of vacancy, whichever event first occurs. The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the City Code Enforcement Officer and shall include the following information supplied by the owner: 
(1)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or owners; 
(2)  If the owner does not reside in Union County or any contiguous county, the name and address of any third party with whom the owner has entered into a contract or agreement with for property management. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section, the owner is consenting that the third party is authorized to receive any and all notices relating to the property and conformance with any and all ordinances; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other parties with an ownership interest in the building. 
(4)  A telephone number where a responsible party can be reached at all times during business and non-business hours; and 
(5)  A vacant building plan as described in subsection (C). 
(B)  For any abandoned real property located within the City of Marysville, any foreclosing entity that files a foreclosure action, accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure, buys real property at a Sheriff's Sale, or accepts property as a result of a government insured mortgage or loan, within thirty (30) days after the property becoming vacant, the foreclosing entity shall register the abandoned property with the City of Marysville Engineering Department. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the foreclosing entity making the initial application for registration and any subsequent applications for registration to provide the following required information: 
(a)  The contact information of foreclosing entity including; company name, address, telephone number and e-mail address. 
(b)  The contact information of property preservation company including; name, address, telephone number and e-mail address. 
(2)  Registration shall remain valid for twelve months from approved registration date. Should the property remain vacant upon expiration of the initial registration, the foreclosing entity shall complete another application to re-register the property and pay an escalating fee schedule as outlined in Section 1320.04. 
(3)  Any person, firm, partnership, co-partnership, association, fiduciary, beneficiary, lender, corporation or any legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change in registration information required by this chapter. 
(4)  If an abandoned property is identified and found not to be registered with the City of Marysville, a notice will be issued to the foreclosing entity or the property preservation company posted as responsible to register the property within thirty (30) days of notice date. 
(5)  Once a registered property is sold and the deed is transferred into the new owner's name, the foreclosing entity or property preservation company must submit in writing to have the property removed from the registry. 
(C)  Upon registration of a vacant building, the owner, pursuant to Section 1320.03(A)(5), shall also file a vacant building plan which must be approved by the City Engineer or designee and which must comply with the following: 
(1)  If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan that complies with Chapter 1303 as well as the Ohio Building Code. 
(a)  If the building is located in the Historic District, a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained prior to demolition as outlined in Section 1136.07. 
(2)  If the building is to remain vacant, an explanation detailing how the building will remain secure, along with the procedure that will be used to maintain the property, and reasons why the building will be left vacant (e.g., building is for sale, etc.); or 
(3)  If the building is to be returned to the appropriate occupancy or use, a rehabilitation plan for the building and grounds. The rehabilitation shall be completed not longer than twelve months from the time permits are obtained, unless the City Engineer or designee grants an extension upon receipt of a written request from the owner detailing the reasons for the extension. Any repairs, improvements or alteration to the property must comply with any applicable zoning, housing, historic preservation, or building codes and the property must be secured during the rehabilitation. 
(D)  The owner shall comply with all laws and codes. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any changes in the information of the vacant building registration within thirty (30) days of the change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant building is revised in any way, it is the duty of the registrant to update in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer registration information as well as its vacant building plan immediately upon any changes being made. The revision(s) must meet the approval of the City Engineer or designee. 
(E)  The owner and subsequent owners shall keep the building secured and safe and the building and grounds properly maintained in accordance with all applicable Property Maintenance Codes set forth in Chapter 1319 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(F)  Any subsequent owner shall register or re-register the vacant building with the Code Enforcement Officer within thirty (30) days of any transfer of an ownership interest in the vacant building if the building continues to remain vacant after the transfer. The new owner(s) shall comply with the approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner until any proposed changes are submitted and meet the approval of the City Engineer or designee. 
(G)  The failure of the owner of the vacant building to obtain a deed for the property or to file the deed with the County Recorder shall not excuse the property owner from registering the property. 
(H)  Failure of the owner or any subsequent owner(s) to maintain the building and premises that result in remedial action taken by the City shall be grounds for revocation of the approved plan and shall be subject to any applicable penalties provided by the law. 
(I)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall include in the file any property specific written statements from community organizations, other interested parties, or citizens regarding the history, problems, status or blighting influence of a vacant building. 
(J)  The registration and all associate processes must be completed in its entirety annually for as long as the property remains vacant. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.04. - Inspection requirements. 
Following the registration of the vacant property, the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct a complete exterior property inspection of the property and premises. 
(A)  A status report will be provided with the findings and current condition of the property. It will include any found violations. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.05. - Maintenance requirements. 
While vacant properties are required to be registered with the City of Marysville pursuant to this chapter, such properties are required to be maintained in accordance with Chapter 1319 and Section 1319.03 of the City of Marysville Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.06. - Security requirements. 
Any structure on the premises of a registered vacant property is required to be maintained in a secure manner, so as not to be accessible to any unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to: 
(A)  Closure and locking of all windows, doors and other openings that may allow access to the interior of a structure. 
(B)  In the case of damaged or broken doors, windows or other openings, they must be repaired properly within thirty (30) days of notification. 
(C)  Boarding up a damaged or unsecure door, window or other opening may be permitted only to eliminate an immediate hazard, but not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(D)  Any property found to be unsecure must be secured within forty-eight (48) hours of notification. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.07. - Vacant building fees. 
The fees described in this section are established in order to defray the cost to the City related to the health, safety and the economic impact of structures which remain vacant for long periods of time, including but not limited to administrative costs for registering and processing the vacant building owner registration form and for the costs incurred by the City in monitoring the vacant building site. The annually increased fee amounts are reasonably related to the costs incurred by the City and, in coordination with the Union County Building Department, for demolition and hazard abatement of or repairs to vacant buildings, as well as the continued administrative costs stated above. 
(A)  The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first year the building remains vacant. For every consecutive year that the building remains vacant, the annual registration fee shall be increased by two hundred dollars ($200.00) over the previous year to a five (5) year maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be used for the fifth and for all consecutive, subsequent years of vacancy. 
(B)  The first annual fee shall be paid at the time the building is registered. If the fee is not paid, the amount owed shall be assessed against the owner and certified to the Union County Auditor as a lien against the property. 
(C)  The fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building permits unless the property is granted an exemption. The fee shall be prorated and a refund may be issued if the building is no longer deemed vacant under the provisions of this article within one hundred eighty (180) days of its registry. 
(D)  All delinquent fees shall be paid by the owner prior to any transfer of an ownership interest in the vacant building. A lien may be placed on the property to collect delinquent fees. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.08. - Exemptions. 
(A)  A building under active construction/renovation and having a valid building permit(s) at the time of initial inspection shall be exempt from the registration until the expiration of the longest running, currently active building permit. 
(B)  A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme weather conditions shall be exempt from the registration requirement for a period of ninety (90) days after the date of the fire or extreme weather event if the property owner submits a request for exemption in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer. This request shall include the names and addresses of the owner or owners, and a statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an expedient manner, or the intent to demolish the building. 
(C)  A building that is for sale and listed with a licensed State of Ohio realtor shall be exempted for a period of twelve (12) months from the start of vacancy, provided that the owner submits proof to the Code Enforcement Officer of such listing and for sale status. 
(D)  Any owner of a vacant building may request an exemption from the provisions of this Chapter by filing a written application with the City who shall timely consider same. In determining whether a request for exemption should be granted, the City Engineer or designee shall consider the following: the applicant's prior record as it pertains to Property Maintenance Code Violations; the amount of vacant property the applicant currently has within the City; and the length of time that the building for which the exemption is sought has been vacant. The City Engineer or designee shall approve, approve with conditions or reject the completed application for exemption within thirty (30) days of receiving it. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.09. - Appeals. 
Any owner who is served a notice of vacant property registration may, within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of such notice, apply for an exemption, in accordance with Section 1320.02(D), or file an appeal to the Exterior Property Maintenance Commission. Said appeal shall be made in writing to the Clerk of Council. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
Sec. 1320.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provisions of this code shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be fined pursuant to the City of Marysville Codified Ordinance 1319.99. 
(Ord. 34-16. Passed 9-26-2016.) 
PART FIFTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
CHAPTER 1501. - OHIO FIRE CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes, ORC 715.26; fire limits, ORC 737.28; inspection of buildings for fire and safety, ORC 715.26; 3737.14; 3737.22. 

Sec. 1501.01. - Fire limits established. 
A district designated as "fire limits" for all legal purposes including administration of the Ohio Building Code shall include the City limits of the City of Marysville, Ohio and all geographic territories outside the City limits covered by Fire Contract between the City of Marysville and Township Trustees of the respective townships. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1501.02. - Adoption; rules and regulations. 
(A)  There is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of Marysville, Ohio, and incorporated by reference as if set out in length herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the safeguard of life and property from hazards of fire and explosion, that certain code designated as The Ohio Fire Code, (most recent edition) published by the International Code Council (International Fire Code). 
(B)  The Director of Administration may adopt such regulations as necessary to implement the Fire Code of the City of Marysville. The rules and regulations so prescribed shall become effective thirty days after receipt by the Clerk of Council to provide time for proper public dissemination and notification of Council members. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1501.03. - Enforcement by Fire Chief. 
The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Chief of the Division of Fire of the City who shall serve as the "Fire Official" thereunder. The Chief may delegate his duties under the Fire Code to a State Certified Fire Safety Inspector. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1501.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-14 repealed  1501.04, which pertained to fire code board of appeals. 
Sec. 1501.05. - Permits and fees. 
The following permits shall be obtained as specified and the fees therefor paid to the Director of Finance, before construction, servicing, operation, installation, use or occupancy for any of the items listed. In general, fees are required for any construction, modification or alteration that requires State approved plans. The specific fees are as follows: 
New business occupying in an existing building ..... $25.00 
New construction, physical alteration structure ..... $50.00 
Fire suppression system plan review and inspection ..... $50.00 
The above fees are payable for multi-family buildings containing four or more residential units, all commercial and industrial structures. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1501.06. - Building plan submission and approval. 
(A)  Two copies of building plans are required to be submitted to the local fire marshal before building or an addition to a building is constructed or erected, before a building is altered, relocated, or building equipment is installed therein, or there is a change of use. This section apply to all buildings except: 
(1)  Single-family, two family and three family dwellings, or their accessory buildings. 
(2)  Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States Government. 
(3)  Buildings which are incidental to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings are located. 
(B)  The plans submitted shall conform to plans approved by a State Agency. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1501.99. - Stop work order, violation and penalty. 
(A)  Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of the Fire Code and/or the Ohio Fire Code as adopted therein or violates any order made thereunder, or builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of Appeals or by a Court of competent jurisdiction, within the time filed herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of penalty or penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(B)  Stop Work Order Issuance. 
(1)  Any person charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, may issue a stop work order whenever he finds, after inspection, situations or circumstances that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The effect of such order shall be limited to the matters specified therein. 
(2)  Every adjudication order shall specify what situations, circumstances or procedures are necessary for the same to comply with this chapter. 
(3)  Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein, the person receiving such order shall cease the work or activity identified in the order until such time as the appeal provided for in accordance with provisions of Section 1501.04 and all appeals from such hearings have been completed or the order issued herein has been released. 
(C)  Noncompliance with Order; Demolition. If any person fails to comply with an order of an officer under any section of the Ohio Fire Code as adopted herein, from which no appeal has been taken or with the order as finally affirmed or modified by the Board of Appeals or by the court in the event of an appeal, within the time fixed in such order or order of affirmance or modification, then such officer may cause such building or premises to be repaired, torn down, demolished, materials removed and all dangerous conditions remedied, at the expense of such person. If such person within thirty days thereafter, fails, neglects or refuses to repay the officer the expense thereby incurred by him, such officer shall certify such expenses, together with a twenty-five percent (25%) penalty thereon to the County Auditor. The Auditor shall enter such expense on the tax duplicates of the County as a special charge against the real estate on which the building is or was situated and the same shall be collected as other taxes, and when collected, shall together with the penalty thereon be refunded to such officer. 
(Ord. 39-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
CHAPTER 1502. - FIRE DEPARTMENT REPOSITORY UNITS 

Sec. 1502.01. - Installation and maintenance. 
(A)  The owner or person in control of the following types of building shall install and maintain a Fire Department Repository Unit of a type approved by the Chief: 
(1)  Any multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units. 
(2)  Any non-residential building where a fire detection or suppression system is monitored by an alarm company or has an external audible alarm. 
(3)  Any building or facility containing a quantity of hazardous materials which would require compliance with Title III of SARA (Superfund Amendment Reauthorization Act). 
(B)  Persons or entities who own existing buildings or structures which are subject to the requirements of this chapter shall have one year from the effective date of this section to comply with the requirements. Persons or entities who construct buildings or structures which would be subject to the requirements of this chapter shall comply with the requirements at the time of construction. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
Sec. 1502.02. - Keys required. 
The owner or person in control of buildings or facilities described in Section 1502.01 required to have a Fire Department Repository Unit shall cause to be placed in such Repository Unit a key to the following areas: 
(A)  Locked points of access in the exterior of the building or facility; 
(B)  Locked points of access to common areas, such as hallways or utility rooms, contained within such buildings or facilities; 
(C)  Locked mechanical rooms; 
(D)  Locked electrical rooms; 
(E)  All other locked areas, other than individual apartments or rented rooms, as directed by the Chief. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
Sec. 1502.03. - Access to Fire Department Repository Unit. 
The owner or person in control of any building or facility described in Section 1502.01 required to have a Fire Department Repository Unit shall be present, himself or through his agent, during access to such Repository Unit by the Fire Department except when the Fire Department has responded to an emergency at the property. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
Sec. 1502.04. - Rules and regulations. 
The Chief may establish rules and regulations for the placement and maintenance of Fire Department Repository Units within the City, including approved types of Fire Department Repository Units. Proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the City Council and filed with the Clerk of Council and shall become effective sixty (60) days after approval by the Mayor. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
Sec. 1502.05. - Update of keys and information. 
The owner or person in control of any building or facility described in Section 1502.01 and required to have a Fire Department Repository Unit shall: 
(A)  Provide keys capable of access to such Fire Department Repository Unit at all times to the Fire Department. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
Sec. 1502.06. - Limitation of liability. 
The City assumes no liability for any of the following: 
(A)  Any defects in the operation of the repository unit, of any of the keys contained within such repository unit or otherwise provided to the City; 
(B)  The failure or neglect of any owner or person in control of a building or facility required to have a repository unit to provide access to the repository unit; or 
(C)  The security of any property required to have a repository unit due to access to the repository unit by any person. 
(Ord. 83-00. Passed 10-26-2000.) 
CHAPTER 1503. - FIRE HYDRANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking near fire hydrant,  351.03(D); criminal mischief,  541.04; subdivision water supply,  1109.08. 

Sec. 1503.01. - Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections. 
(A)  No person shall obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes or on private property. 
(B)  If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Marshal shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the Municipal treasury on certificate of the Fire Marshal and with the approval of the chief administrative official; and the Law Director shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
Sec. 1503.02. - Hydrant use approval. 
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use by the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
Sec. 1503.03. - Location or relocation: approval. 
The Fire Marshal shall recommend to the Director of Administration and the water company the location or relocation of fire hydrants deemed necessary to provide adequate fire flows to those areas under his jurisdiction. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire Marshal and the water company. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
Sec. 1503.04. - Yard systems. 
All new and existing oil storage plants, lumber yards, amusement or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Marshal in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The Fire Marshal shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Marshal may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazards involved require such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire Marshal and the water company, where the fire system is connected directly to the public water supply. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
Sec. 1503.05. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Ohio Fire Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Marshal. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. 49-06. Passed 6-22-2006.) 
Sec. 1503.06. - Public water system. 
The public water distribution system shall be defined as that of the Ohio Water Service company, or its successor. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
Sec. 1503.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates Sections 1503.01 through 1503.05 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 7-81. Passed 2-26-1981.) 
CHAPTER 1511. - OPEN BURNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; air pollution control, ORC Ch. 3704; permit to burn construction debris, ORC 3704.11(C); spreading fire through negligence, ORC 3737.62; open burning, OAC Ch. 3745. 

Sec. 1511.01. - Definitions. 
As used in Chapter 3745-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code and this chapter: 
(A)  Agricultural waste means any waste material generated by crop, horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities, but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure. 
(B)  Economic poisons include but are not restricted to pesticides such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants. 
(C)  Garbage means any waste material resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products. 
(D)  Landscape waste means any plant waste material, except garbage, including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues. 
(E)  Land clearing waste means plant waste material which is removed from land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of land for new agricultural development. 
(F)  Ohio EPA means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies delegated authority by such Director pursuant to ORC 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio Environmental Protection Agency district office. 
(G)  Open burning means the burning of any materials wherein air contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed specifically to comply with the requirements of Ohio Administrative Code 3745-17-09 or 3745-17-10. 
(H)  Residential waste means any waste material, including landscape waste, generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt, liquid petroleum products, or plastics. 
(I)  Restricted area means the area within the boundary of any municipal corporation established in accordance with the provisions of Title 7 of the Ohio Revised Code, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of any such municipal corporation having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any such municipal corporation having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the latest federal census. 
(J)  Unrestricted area means all areas outside the boundaries of a restricted area as defined in subsection (I) hereof. 
(OAC 3745-19-01) 
(K)  Bonfire means an outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes. 
(L)  Recreational fire means an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
(OAC 1301:7-7-03) 
Sec. 1511.02. - Relations to other prohibitions. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any provision in Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19, no open burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency under Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-25 is in effect. 
(B)  No provisions of Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19, permitting open burning, and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of any State department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open burning. 
(OAC 3745-19-02) 
Sec. 1511.03. - Open burning in restricted areas. 
(A)  No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a restricted area except as provided in subsections (B) to (D) hereof; in ORC 3704.11 and in compliance with Section 1511.05 of this chapter. 
(B)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA: 
(1)  Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares, heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar occupational needs. 
(2)  Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth, recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas, or equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood; 
(b)  They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and 
(c)  They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height. 
(3)  Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to paragraph (D)(1)(d) of Rule 3745-50-45 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(4)  Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for commercial or industrial fire prevention. 
(5)  Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa (marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs seized by federal, state or local law enforcement officials. 
Fires allowed by subsections (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(4) hereof shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants. 
(C)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with subsection (B) of Section 1511.04: 
(1)  Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health department, the centers for disease control and prevention, cooperative extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method. 
(2)  Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not meet the requirements of subsection (B)(2) hereof, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours; 
(b)  They are not to be used for waste disposal purposes; and 
(c)  They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood. 
(3)  Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the following conditions are observed: 
(a)  The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants; 
(b)  The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways, railroad tracks, or air fields; 
(c)  The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than one thousand feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises; 
(d)  The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best practicable condition for efficient burning; and 
(e)  No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt, liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials. 
(D)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with subsection (A) of Section 1511.04, provided that any conditions specified in the permission are followed: 
(1)  Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding those materials identified in subsection (B)(3) hereof; 
(2)  Instruction in methods of firefighting or for research in the control of fire as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) publication 1403: "Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures", provided that the application required in subsection (A)(1) of Section 1511.04 is submitted by the commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction; 
(3)  In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose determined to be necessary by the Director and, if required, performed as identified in the appendix to Rule 3745-19-03 of the Ohio Administrative Code. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral approval; 
(4)  Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range or wildlife management practices; and 
(5)  Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities for motion pictures and television. 
(OAC 3745-19-03) 
Sec. 1511.04. - Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA. 
(A)  Permission. 
(1)  An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (A)(6) and (A)(7) hereof, such applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding: 
(a)  The purpose of the proposed burning; 
(b)  The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be burned; 
(c)  The date or dates when such burning will take place; 
(d)  The location of the burning site, including a map showing distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other pertinent landmarks; and 
(e)  The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the emissions of air contaminants. 
(3)  Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of Chapter 3745-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (A)(6) hereof, permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set with oral permission of the Ohio EPA. 
(5)  Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the imposition of other sanctions provided by law. 
(6)  The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio fire academy's mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to subsection (A)(1) hereof shall contain information as required in paragraph (A)(2) of this rule, except the information required in subsections (A)(2)(c) and (A)(2)(d) hereof need not be provided unless it is available at the time of submittal of the application. The academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local air agency at least five working days before each training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. 
(7)  For open burning defined under subsection (D)(2) of Section 1511.03, and paragraph (C)(2) of Rule 3745-19-04 of the Administrative Code, permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with Rule 3745-20-03 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(B)  Notification. 
(1)  Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. It shall be in such form and contain such information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA. 
(2)  Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding: 
(a)  The purpose of the proposed burning; 
(b)  The nature and quantities of materials to be burned; 
(c)  The date or dates when such burning will take place; and 
(d)  The location of the burning site. 
(3)  The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the open burning is not allowed under Chapter 3745-19 of the Administrative Code and the Ohio EPA shall notify the applicant to this effect. 
(OAC 3745-19-05) 
Sec. 1511.05. - Open burning; recreational fires; portable outdoor fireplaces. 
(A)  General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
(C)  Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official in accordance with Rule 1301:7-7-01 of the Ohio Fire Code prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
(D)  Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or local air and water quality management authority, provided that all conditions specified in the authorization are followed. 
(E)  Extinguishment Authority. The Fire Code Official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the Fire Department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
(F)  Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure. 
(G)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a structure. 
(2)  The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
(a)  Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(b)  Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(c)  Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet (3,048 mm) of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
(H)  Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with paragraph (F)(906) of rule 1301:7-7-09 of the Administrative Code with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(OAC 1301:7-7-03) 
Sec. 1511.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty days, or both. 
CHAPTER 1519. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Manufacturers to comply with building and zoning ordinances, ORC 3743.06(F); wholesalers to comply with building and zoning ordinances, ORC 3743.19(G); arrests, seizure of fireworks by certified fire safety inspector, ORC 3743.68; conflict of Fire Marshal's rules with rules of Ohio Board of Building Standards, ORC 3781.11(D). 

Sec. 1519.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Beer and intoxicating liquor have the same meanings as in ORC 4301.01. 
(B)  Booby trap means a small tube that has a string protruding from both ends, that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of the string. 
(C)  Cigarette load means a small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette. 
(D)  (1)  1.3 G fireworks means display fireworks consistent with regulations of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation "Division 1.3" in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. 
(2)  1.4 G fireworks means consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation "Division 1.4" in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. 
(E)  Controlled substance has the same meaning as in ORC 3719.01. 
(F)  Fireworks means any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Section 1519.05. 
(G)  Licensed exhibitor of fireworks or licensed exhibitor means a person licensed pursuant to ORC 3743.50 to 3743.55. 
(H)  Licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed manufacturer means a person licensed pursuant to ORC 3743.02 to 3743.08. 
(I)  Licensed wholesaler of fireworks or licensed wholesaler means a person licensed pursuant to ORC 3743.15 to 3743.21. 
(J)  Novelties and trick noisemakers include the following items: 
(1)  Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user, including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers and snappers; 
(2)  Snakes or glow worms; 
(3)  Smoke devices; 
(4)  Trick matches. 
(K)  Party popper means a small plastic or paper item that contains not more than sixteen milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition, that is ignited by pulling string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are expelled when the item is ignited. 
(L)  Railroad means any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant. 
(M)  Smoke device means a tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
(N)  Snake or glow worm means a device that consists of a pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns. 
(O)  Snapper means a small, paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand, and that, when dropped, implodes. 
(P)  Trick match means a kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a shower of sparks. 
(Q)  Wire sparkler means a sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a non-explosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition and that contains no more than one hundred grams of this mixture. 
(ORC 3743.01) 
Sec. 1519.02. - Public exhibition permit required; fee; bond; records. 
(A)  A licensed exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition within the Municipality shall apply for approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief and from the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer. 
The required approval shall be evidenced by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the exhibition, the form for which shall be prescribed by the State Fire Marshal. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the Fire Marshal or, if it is available, from the Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer. 
(B)  Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of fireworks, the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that, in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. Each applicant shall show the applicant's license as an exhibitor of fireworks to the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer. 
The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the Fire Marshal pursuant to ORC 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may revoke the permit for noncompliance with the rules. 
(C)  The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall not issue a permit until the applicant pays a permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus any necessary costs of investigation of the applicant and of inspecting the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted. 
Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and to Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition, or proof of insurance coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for liability arising from injury, death or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition. The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this subsection. The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this subsection. 
(D)  (1)  Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the Municipality, and identify the certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer who will be present before, during, and after the exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the Fire Marshal, who shall keep a record of the permits received. A permit is not transferable or assignable. 
(2)  The Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall list the name of the exhibitor, the exhibitor's license number, the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition and the number of the permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition. 
(E)  The governing authority having jurisdiction in the location where an exhibition is to take place shall require that a certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer be present before, during, and after the exhibition, and shall require the certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this chapter and ORC Chapter 3743. 
(ORC 3743.54) 
Sec. 1519.03. - Unlawful conduct by exhibitor. 
(A)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the Fire Marshal pursuant to ORC 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Divisions (C) and (D) of that section. 
(B)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Section 1519.02 or if a permit so secured is revoked by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement official or a designee of such Police Chief or other similar law enforcement official pursuant to that section. 
(C)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with ORC 3743.54 and 3743.55. 
(D)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted. 
(E)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee is registered with the Fire Marshal under ORC 3743.56. 
(ORC 3743.64) 
Sec. 1519.04. - Possession, sale or discharge prohibited; exceptions. 
(A)  No person shall possess fireworks in this Municipality or shall possess for sale or sell fireworks in this Municipality, except a licensed manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by ORC 3743.02 to 3743.08, a licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by ORC 3743.15 to 3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by ORC 3743.40, an out-of-state resident as authorized by ORC 3743.44, a resident of this State as authorized by ORC 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by ORC 3743.50 to 3743.55 and Section 1519.02 and except as provided in Section 1519.05. 
(B)  Except as provided in Section 1519.05 and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to ORC 3743.50 to 3743.55 and Section 1519.02, no person shall discharge, ignite or explode any fireworks in this Municipality. 
(C)  No person shall use in a theater or public hall, what is technically known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and sulphur. 
(D)  No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under eighteen years of age. No person under eighteen years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible adult. No person under eighteen years of age shall touch or possess fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way disruptive to the safe operation of the premises. 
(E)  Except as otherwise provided in ORC 3743.44, no person, other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping permit holder, shall possess 1.3 G fireworks. 
(ORC 3743.65) 
Sec. 1519.05. - Application. 
This chapter does not prohibit or apply to the following: 
(A)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation or highway use; 
(B)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads; 
(C)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with athletics as signals or for ceremonial purposes; 
(D)  The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use by, or sale to the Armed Forces of the United States and the militia of this State of pyrotechnic devices; 
(E)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive material are used, provided that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps; 
(F)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; 
(G)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of wire sparklers. 
(H)  The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge, and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges, provided that the exhibition complies with all of following: 
(1)  No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition; 
(2)  The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than two hundred feet; 
(3)  The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition. 
(ORC 3743.80) 
Sec. 1519.99. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six months or both. 
(ORC 3743.99(C)) 
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES - OF MARYSVILLE 
The Codified Ordinances of Marysville cover all ordinances of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent ordinances are set forth in full in the Codified Ordinances. 
References must be made frequently to many special ordinances-particularly those related to property, such as dedications, vacating of property, easements, purchase, sale, etc. In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances are listed. These tables list ordinances chronologically by subject, and include both a citation to and brief description of each ordinance. 
TABLE A - FRANCHISES 
Ord. No. Date Description 26 12-14-1899 W.H. Armstrong Telephone service. 27 2-23-1894 Gamble C. Shields Telephone service. 316 6-26-30 Ohio Fuel Gas Co. to lay pipes. 428 8-13-42 United Telephone Co. to construct and maintain wires and cables. 650 11-21-61 Dayton Power and Light Co. for municipal lighting. 676 5-23-63 Ohio Fuel Gas Co., gas rates. 704 3-25-64 Traffic signal, electric rates. 733 4-22-65 Dayton Power and Light Co., municipal lighting (amends Ord. 650). 768 11-10-66 Dayton Power and Light Co., for municipal lighting. 779 6-8-67 Columbia Gas of Ohio, gas rates. 871-71 8-12-71 Regulates gas prices of Columbia Gas of Ohio to City and its inhabitants for 4 years; repeals Ord. 779-67. 888-72 6-22-72 Regulates street lighting charges of Dayton Power and Light Co. for 4 years. 973-75 12-1-75 Regulates gas prices of Columbia Gas of Ohio to City and its inhabitants for 4 years; repeals Ord. 871-71. 987-76 11-11-76 Regulates street lighting charges of Dayton Power and Light Co. for 2 years. 1028-78 7-27-78 Regulates water rates of Ohio Water Service Co. to City and its inhabitants for 16 months from 9-1-78. 1051-79 7-26-79 Amends Ordinance 973-75 re Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., gas rates for 4 years. 1070-80 3-13-80 Fixes Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. gas rates to 12-31-80. 2-81 1-8-81 Fixes Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. gas rates for three years. 12-82 6-14-82 Dayton Power and Light Co. - regulates street lighting rates for 10 days and 12 months. 4-83 1-14-83 Regulates street lighting charges of Dayton Power and Light Co. for 2 years. 66-83 10-27-83 Fixes Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. gas rates for 5 years. 43-84 10-25-84 Regulates street lighting charges of Dayton Power and Light Co. for 24 months. 48-86 12-18-86 Dayton Power and Light Co., for municipal lighting. 2-88 2-25-88 Dayton Power and Light Co., for electricity. 3-88 2-25-88 Union Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc., for electricity. 19-88 8-25-88 Renews franchise with Centel Cable Television Co. for C.A.T.V. 64-98 10-22-98 Extends the cable television franchise with Time Warner Cable for six months. 16-99 6-10-99 Adopts the cable television franchise with Time Warner Entertainment L.P., d.b.a. Time Warner Communications. 5-04 2-12-04 Amends Ord. 3-88.  
TABLE B - EASEMENTS 
Ord. No. Date Description 549 2-15-53 For sewage system improvement. 617 10-27-60 Oakdale Cemetery Trustees. Res. 556-78 4-27-78 Intention to appropriate sanitary sewer easement through property of Kreamer. 18-82 7-11-82 To Dayton Power and Light Co. over an alley east of Main St. 19-82 7-11-82 To Dayton Power and Light Co. over North Maple St. 47-82 11-11-82 To Dayton Power and Light Co. for service line to Sewage Treatment Plant. 59-83 10-13-83 Vacation of utility easement in Connolly Addition. 4-84 5-10-84 Accepts easement from D. Ingram, E. Richardson and the Board of Education for a sanitary sewer. 34-84 9-13-84 To Ohio Water Service Co. for water lines on property at Lewis Park, Collins St. and Grove St. 35-84 9-13-84 To Ohio Water Service Co. for water lines along Grove St. 39-84 9-27-84 To Dayton Power and Light Co. for electric lines on Raymond Rd. 34-85 6-27-85 Vacation of utility easement in Will-A-Rose Estates Addition. 70-85 11-26-85 To Dayton Power and Light Co. for electric lines on property adjacent to the proposed Municipal Building. 12-87 4-9-87 Accepting weir easement across Mill Creek from Marysville Mobile Home Park and Shouhayib Investment Co. 27-87 8-13-87 Accepting sewer easement adjacent to State Rte. 38 from Vernon L. and Elizabeth Simpson. 40-87 11-12-87 Accepting easement from Mary Pl. sewer. 24-88 11-10-88 Chestnut St. storm sewer. 2-89 1-12-89 Sanitary force main extension across Marysville Mobile Home Park property to the wastewater treatment plant. 9-90 3-8-90 Vacates a portion of a sewer easement on property of J.A. and R.L. Roby. 38-90 8-23-90 To C.A. and S. G. Shoots for the encroachment of their home and barn upon an alley right-of-way. 20-92 7-9-92 Accepts easements for the industrial parkway sewer. 6-93 3-11-93 Accepts easements adjacent to London Ave. for a sanitary sewer. 7-93 3-11-93 Accepts easements adjacent to E. Fifth St. for a sanitary sewer. 12-94 3-24-94 Grants an easement to Shirley L. Cook for the encroachment of her garage upon City's Mary Place right-of-way. 39-94 10-27-94 Grants an easement to Dayton Power and Light Co. on Raymond Road. 43-94 11-10-94 Accepts various easements for new and replacement utility lines in the City. 1-95 1-12-95 Accepts a sanitary sewer easement on property owned by Daniel and Emogene Ellen Plank adjacen to Columbus Ave. 18-95 5-11-95 Grants an easement to McAuliffe Brothers, Inc., for the encroachment of their building upon the City's East Third Street right-of-way. 7-96 2-8-96 Accepts a water line easement on property owned by Timberview Development Co. 19-96 4-11-96 Accepts an easement from Union Rural Electric to construct the Northwest Parkway Lift Station. 35-96 7-11-96 Grants a sewer easement to the Union County Board of Commissioners. 49-96 9-12-96 Vacating two sewer easements at 1615 Greenwood Colony. 5-97 2-13-97 Accepts a sanitary sewer easement on property owned by Gene L. Volbrath adjacent to 849 Milford Ave. 6-97 2-13-97 Accepts a sanitary sewer easement on property owned by Alma R. Daniels at 849 Milford Ave. 21-97 5-22-97 Accepts an easement on a 1.334 acre tract of land located on North Main St. from Parenteau Builders, Inc. 22-97 5-22-97 Accepts a sidewalk easement from Clarence W. Henson to construct a sidewalk easement on Collins Ave. 23-97 5-22-97 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from Douglas Nicol along Milford Ave. 24-97 5-22-97 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement on Milford Ave. located on land known as Evans Property. 39-97 7-10-97 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from Charles and Marjorie Weaver on property at 195 Fairview. 12-98 1-22-98 Grants an easement to Dayton Power and Light Co. at 125 East Sixth St. for underground electric lines. 13-98 1-22-98 Grants an easement to Dayton Power and Light Co. at the City swimming pool for underground electric lines. 33-98 5-28-98 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from the State of Ohio. 56-98 8-13-98 Accepts a sanitary sewer easement from Marysville Land Co. 63-98 10-22-98 Grants an easement to United Telephone Co. in the northeast corner of Millcreek Park. 29-99 9-9-99 Grants an easement to Dayton Power and Light Co. for underground electric transmission lines over City property at 455 North Maple St. 46-99 12-9-99 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from Frank and Pamela Allen and Maria Tong at 1388 and 1432 Collins Ave. 47-99 12-9-99 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from Harlond and Annabelle Hays at 517 South Walnut. 7-00 1-13-00 Accepts a perpetual right-of-way and sewer easement from Curtis and Rebecca Nice. 8-00 1-13-00 Accepts various easements from Timber Trails water and sewer. 9-00 1-13-00 Accepts various easements for Industrial Parkway Line. 10-00 1-13-00 Accepts various temporary construction and permanent easements for the North Trunk Sewer. 11-00 1-27-00 Grants a storm sewer easement to the Board of County Commissioners for the Gables Nursing Home. 21-00 2-24-00 Accepts a perpetual sewer easement from Richard and Joyce Harper, John Duke, and Sandra and John Bunsold in the Timber Trails/Boerger Road Area. 36-00 5-11-00 Accepts temporary construction and permanent easements for the North Trunk Sewer from Richard Rowland. 37-00 5-11-00 Accepts temporary construction and permanent easements for Timber Trails/Boerger Road sewer and water lines from Joseph and Georgia Duke. 46-00 5-25-00 Accepts an easement for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Project from William Bunsold. 51-00 6-22-00 Accepts temporary construction and permanent easements for the North Trunk Sewer from Richard and Phyllis Radinski. 56-00 7-13-00 Accepts temporary construction and permanent easements for the North Trunk Sewer from Ralph and Marilyn Wilson. 57-00 7-13-00 Accepts easements for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Project from Jennings and Lisa Heflin. 58-00 7-13-00 Accepts easements for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Project from Jerome and Merele Keller. 62-00 7-27-00 Accepts various temporary construction and permanent easements for Timber Trails Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Improvement easements. 64-00 7-27-00 Grants an easement to United Telephone Co. of Ohio to place facilities along old railroad right-of-way north of Dunham Ave. between Columbia Ave. and Poplar St. 65-00 8-10-00 Accepts an easement for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Projects from George Kechter. 70-00 8-24-00 Accepts an easement for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Project from Daniel and Melinda Froehlich. 75-00 9-28-00 Accepts an easement for the installation and maintenance of sewers for Timber Trails/Boerger Road Project from David and Tami Speicher. 78-00 10-23-00 Accepts various temporary construction and permanent easements for Timber Trails Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Improvements. 2-01 1-11-01 Accepts a sanitary sewer easement from the Huntington National Bank. 4-01 1-11-01 Accepts the sanitary sewers and easements along Industrial Parkway north of Fladt Road. Res. 2-02 1-10-02 Authorizes easement for water lines across property of Ohio Reformatory for Women. 63-02 11-7-02 Grants an easement to SHY Inc., to construct and maintain a water line across Timber Trails Drive. 20-03 6-26-03 Vacates a portion of a roadway easement that lies south of Quail Hollow Drive and to accept an easement for signage purposes in the area of the vacated easement from Real Living-Marysville Investment, Ltd. 42-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.0991 acre permanent utility easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 43-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.868 acre permanent utility easement and a 3.071 acre temporary construction easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 44-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.949 acre permanent utility easement and a 3.394 acre temporary construction easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 45-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.135 acre permanent utility easement, a 0.037 acre temporary construction easement and a 0.315 acre permanent subterranean easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 46-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.708 acre permanent utility easement and a 1.772 acre temporary construction easement for the trunk interceptor project from WWTF to MWRF. 47-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.019 acre permanent utility easement for the trunk interceptor project for WWTF to MWRF. 48-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.025 acre permanent utility easement and a 0.418 acre temporary construction easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 49-06 7-13-06 Appropriates a 0.091 acre permanent utility easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 77-06 8-24-06 Appropriates a 1.463 acre permanent utility easement and a 4.248 acre temporary construction easement for the trunk interceptor project from existing WWTF to MWRF. 60-07 11-1-07 Accepts dedication of easements and public utilities for Shepherd's Landing. 42-11 12-1-11 Grants an easement to Dayton Power and Light Company from the Western Property Line of the site to the County Home Road Fire Station. 1-17 1-10-2017 Effecting the abandonment and replacement of an easement that runs along the north side of Emmaus Road located on "Reserve O": (5.5953 acres) in Green Pastures subdivision Section 2 granted to Connolly Construction Co. 34-17 7-24-2017 Abandons an existing right-of-way easement for Frontage Road and Delaware Avenue and replaces with public right-of-way along Delaware Avenue. 47-17 8-28-2017 Accepts and approves the dedication of an easement for Waterline. 13-18 2-12-2018 Authorize the city manager to enter into an easement for sidewalk purposes. 22-18 3-26-2018 Abandons two utlilty easements within the Memorial Professional Park Development on Professional Parkway. 23-18 3-26-2018 Abandons a drainage easement with Hickory Run Development (near Southard Road). 25-18 4-9-2018 Amends the current easement for ingress and egress with Kroger.  
TABLE C - VACATING STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Ord. No. Date Description 329 12-24-31 Alley north of the boulevard from Park Ave. east to an alley. 404 12-14-39 Linden Street from Seventh St. to Sixth St. 423 11-27-41 Certain alleys. 457 7-25-46 Alley running from intersection of Fourth St. and Fifth St. to Third St. 469 3-13-47 Unnamed alley along western line of Lot 677. 504 10-11-51 Alley in Samuel C. Lee addition. 509 1-10-52 Alley extending from West Sixth St. 520 8-28-52 Revert back to Union County Farm Bureau Co-op. 795-68 4-18-68 Portion of Walnut St. north of Fourth St. 799-68 7-25-68 Portion of East Eighth St. 813-69 1-9-69 Oak St. south of Ninth St. and portion of an alley between South Oak and South Walnut Sts. in the W.C. Barnett Addition. 844-70 8-13-70 Cedar St. between Third St. and Fourth St. 939-74 1-10-74 Alley east of Lots 720 through 723, and an alley north of Lots 726 through 731. 950-74 11-14-74 Alley north of Lots 766 through 773 and south of Lots 750 and 755. 951-74 11-14-74 Oak St. north of Fourth St., and an alley north of Fourth St. between Walnut and Oak Sts. 1003-77 11-22-77 Alley running north from Center St. between Grand Ave. and Park Ave. 1020-78 5-25-78 Alley located north of Lots 703 to 705 in Sunnyside Park Addition and south of Lots 787 to 789 and part of 790 in Edgewood Terrace Addition. 23-83 4-14-83 The following alleys are vacated: (1) Between Park Ave. and Grand Ave. and south of Center St., (2) Between Park Ave. and Grand Ave. and south of Center St., (3) Parallel to north of First St., from Elwood Ave. to N. Main St., (4) Between Lot 681 and Lot 697, north of First St., (5) Between Buerger St. and Connolly St., (6) Between Lot 897 and Lot 898, west of Buerger St., (7) Parallel to south of W. Sixth St., from Grove St. to Mulberry St., (8) Between Grove St. and Mulberry St. and between W. Sixth St. and W. Seventh St., (9) Between W. Sixth St. and W. Seventh St. and 340 ft. east of Mulberry St., (10) Between Grove St. and Linden St. and between W. Seventh St. and W. Eighth St., (11) Between Grove St. and Mulberry St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., (12) Between Mulberry St. and Linden St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., (13) Between Linden St. and Buckeye St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the north by lots 510, 511 and 512, (14) Between Linden St. and Buckeye St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the west by lots 519, 520, 521, 522 and 523, (15) Between Linden St. and Buckeye St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the north by lots 518 and 523, (16) Between Buckeye St. and South Maple St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the north by lots 476, 477, 478, 479 and 480, (17) Between Buckeye St. and S. Maple St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the west by lots 494, 495 and 496, (18) Between Buckeye St. and S. Maple St. and between W. Ninth St. and Collins Ave., bounded on the north by lot 496, (19) Between S. Plum St. and S. Walnut St. and between E. Ninth St. and E. Tenth St., (20) Between S. Plum St. and S. Walnut St., and the portion of E. Tenth St. bounded on the north by lot 276, (21) The portion of E. Eleventh St., 150 feet west from S. Plum St., (22) Between S. Plum St. and S. Walnut St. and south from E. Eleventh St., (23) Parallel and east of Grand Ave., and north from W. Third St., (24) Parallel and 180 feet south of W. Sixth St., from Buckeye St. to Locust St., (25) Between N. Plum St. and N. Walnut St. and from E. Fifth St. to E. Fourth St., (26) Between S. Walnut St. and S. Chestnut St. and 520 feet south from E. Ninth St., (27) Parallel and south of E. Sixth St. and 210 feet east from Poplar St., (28) Between Elwood Ave. and N. Main St. and 150 feet north from W. Second St., (29) Parallel and southwest of Elwood Ave., (30) Between N. Oak St. and Olive St. and from E. Fourth St. to E. Fifth St., (31) Between S. Oak St. and S. Chestnut St. and east from E. Seventh St. to Conrail railroad right-of-way, (32) Between S. Main St. and S. Plum St. and between E. Eighth St. and Conrail railroad right-of-way, (33) Between S. Main St. and S. Plum St. and between E. Eighth St. and the Conrail railroad right-of-way. 41-89 10-12-89 A portion of Mill Rd. 9-92 4-23-92 Certain portions of an alley between Eighth and Ninth Sts. and east of Oak St. 11-93 4-8-93 Alleys between W. Sixth and S. Court Sts. 9-95 2-22-95 A portion of the North Plum Street right-of-way on the east side of North Plum St. and north of East Fourth St. 40-97 7-10-97 An alley between East 10th. St. and East 11th St. between South Walnut and South Plum Sts. 66-00 8-10-00 A portion of Sycamore St. from the Jackson south property line to the end of the Sycamore St. right-of-way in Mill Creek. 67-00 8-10-00 Tenth St. between South Plum St. and vacated alley north of East 11th St. 37-05 6-9-05 A portion of Charles Lane from the property line between Lot 1750 and 1751 to Coleman's Crossing Blvd. 27-11 8-11-11 Abandoned Raymond Road right-of-way from West Fifth Street to the relocated Raymond Road.  
TABLE D - DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL 
Ord. No. Date Description 198 3-28-20 Victory Heights Addition. 522 10-9-52 Park Lawn Addition. 565 7-12-56 McAuliffe Addition. 605 9-24-59 Strico Addition. 606 10-22-59 Edgewood Heights Addition. 644 7-27-61 Lakeview Subdivision. 646 10-12-61 Oakwood Terrace Subdivision. 648 11-9-61 Barrhaven Addition No. 3. 659 3-22-62 Wooded Acres Subdivision. 668 12-13-62 Parkview Drive and part of Park Avenue and part of Grand Avenue. 682 9-12-63 Wooded Acres Subdivision (see Ord. 659). 698 2-13-64 Improvements on Connolly and Buerger Streets in Lakeview Subdivision. 740 6-10-65 Barrhaven Addition No. 1. 741 6-24-65 Schwartzkopf property on North Maple Street. 748 9-9-65 Barrhaven Addition No. 4. 798-68 5-23-68 Plat of Barrhaven No. 2. 812-69 1-9-69 Plat of Fairwood Addition. 823-69 8-28-69 Plat of Barrhaven Addition No. 5. 845-70 8-13-70 Stocksdale Dr. from London Rd. to Milford Ave. 894-72 4-27-72 Plat of Rolling Hills Subdivison including Kenny Lane. 896-72 6-8-72 Milcrest Drive. 923-73 4-26-73 Barrhaven No. 6. 929-73 9-27-73 Dedication of Carriage Acres being 24.5 acres adjacent to Waldo Rd. 931-73 12-27-73 Plat of Rolling Hills Amended Subdivision including extension of Kenny Lane. 932-73 12-27-73 Plat of Hardin Place Subdivision. 940-74 2-14-74 Amended plat of portion of Carriage Acres. Res. 497-74 9-12-74 Accepting the following: Hardin Place, Edgewood Dr., Kenny Lane, and all streets in Barrhaven. 952-74 11-14-74 Plat of Greenwood Colony Section 1. 960-75 2-27-75 Amended plat of Hardin Place. 1043-79 1-25-79 Dedication of Lewis Business Center Phase I. 1060-79 11-20-79 Dedication of 4.51 acres being Will-A-Rose Estates Phase I. 1067-80 2-14-80 Dedication of Lewis Business Center, Phase II. 1082-80 7-10-80 Dedication of Will-A-Rose Estates Phase 2 belonging to Coleman. 27-81 7-25-81 Accepting dedication of Windsor Manor West Subdivision. 56-85 10-10-85 Accepting dedication of Marysville Square Industrial/Commercial Park. 5-90 3-23-90 Accepts improvements in Timberview Phase #1. 21-90 6-14-90 Accepts improvements in Greenwood Colony extension. 4-92 2-13-92 Accepts improvements in Marysville Industrial Park. 37-92 12-10-92 Final plat and improvements in Mill Creek Center, Phase 1. 38-92 12-10-92 Final plat and improvements in Timberview Subdivision, Phase 2. 39-92 12-10-92 Final plat and improvements in Greenwood Colony, Section 3. 40-92 12-10-92 Final plat and improvements in Greenwood Colony, Section 4. 56-95 12-14-95 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Greenwood Colony, Section 5. 57-95 12-14-95 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Morey Drive, Phase I. 75-96 12-12-96 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Timberview III. 76-96 12-12-96 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Green Pastures, Phase One. 77-96 12-12-96 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Green Pastures, Phase Two. 78-96 12-12-96 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Mill Valley, Phase One. 79-96 12-12-96 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and streets in Ashton Meadows, Phase One. 61-98 10-8-98 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in the Woods at Quail Hollow, Phases I and II. 71-98 11-24-98 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in Ashton Meadows Phase II. 72-98 11-24-98 Accepts dedication of streets and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in Greenwood Colony, Phase II. 73-98 11-24-98 Accepts dedication of streets and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in Green Pastures, Phase 3 and 4. 37-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Woods at Mill Valley, Phase II, Parts 1, 2 and 3. 38-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Woods at Mill Valley, Phase I. 39-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Mill Valley, Phase III, Parts 1, 2 and 3. 40-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Milford Estates, Phase I. 41-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Green Pastures, Section V. 42-99 11-9-99 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Greenwood Colony, Section V, Phase 2, Part 1. 26-00 3-23-00 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Northwoods Subdivision, Section 1. 35-00 5-11-00 Accepts dedication of storm and sanitary sewer and water lines and streets in the Milfordview Subdivision, Section 1. 12-01 3-22-01 Accepts dedication of streets, easements and public utilities for the Meadows Subdivision. 70-02 12-5-02 Accepts dedication of sanitary lift station for Watkins Glen Subdivision located on Watkins Road. 25-03 7-24-03 Accepts the dedication of certain real property presently used as Eljer Park's Soccer Field. 94-06 11-16-06 Accepts the dedication of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in Coleman's Crossing. 95-06 11-16-06 Accepts the dedication of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines as well as streets in Creek Center Phase 2. 58-07 10-25-07 Accepts dedication of Park Land in the Woods at Mill Valley. 34-09 9-10-09 Dedication of storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, and streets, constructed and installed by developers, in various areas throughout the City. 1-10 1-14-10 Accepts dedication of Park Land in the Woods at Mill Valley North. 22-10 6-24-10 Approval of the amended final development plan for Halcyon Village, formerly Galbury Meadows, Planned Unit Development. 2-11 2-10-11 Recommends approval of the amended final development plan for Halcyon Village Planned Unit Development. 3-12 1-12-12 Accepts the dedication of water lines constructed and installed in the Village at Timber Lakes. 11-14 3-27-14 Accepts dedication of certain real property, parcel No.17-00120-13-1010, on which the City-owned Jerome Village Regional Pump Station is location. 80-14 11-20-14 Accepts dedication of certain real property, (Parcel No. 2900080800000). 81-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Brock Road (CR-16)-16" Water Main Improvements. 82-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Industrial Parkway (Cr-1)-36" Water Main Improvements. 83-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Jerome Village Regional Pump Station. 84-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Jerome Village-15" Force Main. 85-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Ryan Parkway, Phase 1-16" Water Main Improvements. 86-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 6, Phase 1 Water Main Improvements. 87-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 6, Phase 2 Water Main Improvements. 88-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 7, Phase 1 Water Main Improvements. 89-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 7, Phase 2 Water Main Improvements. 90-14 11-20-14 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 7, Phase 3 Water Main Improvements. 14-15 4-9-15 Accepts the dedication of the Scott Farms, Section 4, Phase 3 Site Development Improvements. 1-16 1-28-16 Accepts the dedication of the New California Hills, Phases XI and XII Site Development Improvements. 6-16 3-23-16 Accepts the dedication of the Walker Villas Condominium Public Utility infrastructure. 10-16 4-28-16 Accepts dedication of certain real property, Parcel No. 29000809800. 11-16 4-28-16 Accepts dedication of certain real property, Parcel No. 2900010008000. 12-16 4-28-16 Accepts dedication of certain real property, Parcel No. 290008106000. 15-16 5-26-16 Accepts the dedication of the Dublin Green Site Development Improvements. 53-16 12-12-16 Accepts the dedication of the Adena Pointe, Section 4 public infrastructure. 33-17 7-24-2017 Accepts the dedication of the additional right-of-way on Vine Street. 36-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 1 Water Main Improvements. 37-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 2 Water Main Improvements. 38-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Glacier Park Neighborhood Section 8 Water Main Improvements. 39-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Hyland-Croy Road, Phase 2 16" Water Main Improvements. 40-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Hyland-Croy Road, Phase 3 16" Water Main Improvements. 41-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Hyland-Croy Road, Phase 4 16" Water Main Improvements. 42-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Jerome Road (CR-11) - Glacier Park Neighborhood 12" Water Main Improvements. 43-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Jerome Road (CR-11) - Eversole Run Neighborhood 12" Water Main Improvements. 44-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Ravenhill Parkway, Phase 2 16" Water Main Improvements. 45-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Ryan Parkway, Phase 2 16" Water Main Improvements. 46-17 8-14-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Wells Road (CR-17) 8" Water Main Improvements. 58-17 11-27-2017 Accepts dedication of certain real property, situated in the State of Ohio, County of Union and City of Marysville, Parcel No. 29-0022001.675. 73-17 12-18-2017 Accepts the dedication of the Adena Pointe, Section 3 Public Infrastructure. 74-17 12-18-2017 Accepts the dedication of the additional right-of-way on Walnut Street. 16-18 3-12-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Waterford Estates Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Improvements. 17-18 3-12-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Village Neighborhood Section 4 Water Main Improvements. 18-18 3-12-2018 Accepting the dedication of the Eversole Run Neighborhood Section 1, Phase 1 Water Main Improvements. 19-18 3-12-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Eversole Run Neighborhood Section 4 Water Main Improvements. 20-18 3-12-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Eversole Run Neighborhood Section 5 Water Main Improvements. 21-18 3-12-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Eversole Run Neighborhood Section 6 Water Main Improvements. 28-18 4-9-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 12 Public Infrastructure. 29-18 4-9-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 13 Public Infrastructure. 30-18 4-9-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 14 Public Infrastructure. 31-18 4-9-2018 Dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 15 Public Infrastructure. 32-18 4-9-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 16 Public Infrastructure. 33-18 4-9-2018 Accepts the dedication of the Woods at Mill Valley North Phase 1, Part 17 Public Infrastructure.  
TABLE E - ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY 
Ord. No. Date Description 146 3-9-16 Lentz Manufacturing property. 510 12-27-51 Part of Inlot No. 1, Inlot No. 22, Inlot No. 97 and 104; Inlot No. 105. 742 7-8-65 Seventy-nine hundredths (0.79) of an acre of Oakdale Cemetery land. 739 5-27-65 Part of Oakdale Cemetery to By-Pass. Res. 452-70 2-12-70 Sale of property at Fourth and Walnut Sts. to Clemans Brothers, Inc. 839-70 1-22-70 Authorizes bids for sale of property at Fourth and Walnut Sts. being parts of Inlots 112 and 105. 990-76 11-23-76 Purchase of 221 S. Main St. from Pfarr. 1009-78 3-9-78 Authorizes sale of the area known as the "Park" in Carriage Acres Subdivision. 18-83 12-8-83 Accepts gift of 1.05 acres adjacent to Oakdale Cemetery. 48-84 11-8-84 Sale of part of Scott property. 23-86 7-10-86 Sale of 111 W. Sixth St. 44-86 10-23-86 Conveys 111 W. Sixth St. to R. Larry Schneider. 33-87 9-10-87 Conveys 740 N. Main St. and 740 N. Main rear to Franke's Wood Products. 35-89 7-27-89 Accepts gift of two parcels from Union Post No. 79 American Legion for maintenance and operation of recreational facilities. 33-90 8-9-90 Authorizes the Mayor to convey property on Delaware Ave. to the State of Ohio Dept. of Transportation. 34-90 8-9-90 Appropriates a temporary right-of-way on Delaware Ave. 43-90 9-27-90 Appropriates a temporary and a permanent right-of-way on Delaware Ave. 52-90 11-20-90 Appropriates water supply and distribution system. 51-91 11-26-91 Appropriates a temporary and a permanent right-of-way on parcel #1 of Mid-Ohio Subdivision. 8-92 3-12-92 Authorizes sale of property at the corner of Sixth and Main Sts. 44-94 11-10-94 Accepts the purchase of .409 acres on North Main St. from North Main Motors, Inc. 53-94 12-22-94 Accepts gift of 1.985 acres from Jeffrey and Richard Roby. 13-95 4-11-95 Purchase of two acres on State Route 4 from the Union County Commissioners. 65-95 12-28-95 Accepts gift of 13.679 acres from Edward Rhode and Kamal Shouhayib. 17-96 4-11-96 Accepts property from Conrail to maintain public access to Sycamore St. 18-96 4-11-96 Accepts 3.4 acres of land on Industrial Parkway at Fladt Road from Timberview Development Co. 8-97 3-13-97 Accepts 16.38 acres at the west end of Millwood Blvd. for Park land from the Borror Corp. 12-97 3-13-97 Appropriates real estate to make street improvements along a certain tract of land owned by Consolidated Rail Corp. for $27,500. 37-97 6-26-97 Accepts 32.288 acres for Park land from Dominion Homes, Inc. 44-97 7-24-97 Purchase of 1.9 acres on North Cherry St. from Evangelical Lutheran Trinity Congregation for $37,000. 60-97 11-13-97 Sale of 14.215 acres east of the realigned Raymond Road and north of West Fifth St. 21-99 8-12-99 Accepts purchase agreement for approximately 212.258 acres from Carol and George Deringer. 12-00 1-27-00 Accepts 0.388 acres of land between McDonalds and Advance Auto Parts from Union County Family YMCA. 45-00 5-25-00 Purchase of 1.031 acres on Southard Road from William Bunsold to be used for a lift station. 7-02 2-28-02 Purchase of 410 S. Main St. from David and Teresa Troyer, as a site for a City Administration Building. 8-02 2-28-02 Purchase of two real estate parcels located at 441 S. Plum St. from Classic Petroleum Marketing Inc., as a site for a City Administration Building. 11-02 3-14-02 Purchase of 1.309 acres and .003 acres located at the intersection of State Route 38 and State Route 736 from Vernon and Marjeanne Morrison as the proposed relocation of State Route 736. 66-04 12-16-04 Accepts a gift of 55.958 acres under trust and an additional .736 acres as a land laboratory for school, scout and other educational groups. 7-08 3-13-08 Accepts gift of real estate (1 acre) on N. Maple St. from T.P. and A.J. Treasure. 58-08 12-18-08 Amends Ord. 35-89 accepting a gift of certain real estate from Union Post No. 79 American Legion to maintain and operate recreational facilities. 4-11 2-24-11 Accepts purchase agreement for real estate parcel (4 acres at 18200 SR 4 and County Home Road). 20-14 4-24-14 Accepts a gift of real estate, Parcel Nos. 2900220019320 (1121 Valley Drive, Lot 3834), 2900220019330 (1113 Valley Drive, Lot 3835), and 2900220019340 (1105 Valley Drive, Lot 3836) from Dominion Homes. 21-14 5-8-14 Accepts a gift of real estate, Parcel Nos. 2900220022000 (South of Cinnamon Drive "F" Mill Road) and 2900220011000 ("G" 17300 Mill Road) in Mill Valley Phase 1 from BRC Properties, Inc. 73-14 11-6-14 Authorizes the Mayor to enter into a real estate purchase contract to sell the parcel of real estate located at Charles Lane and being a .388 acre parcel of land numbered 2900044130000 in the Union County Auditor's Office. 14-16 5-26-16 Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a real estate purchase contract for the sale of a 0.222 acre parcel on Dunham Street. 14-17 3-13-2017 Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a real estate lease agreement for farming the City-owned property at Industrial Parkway, between Coleman's Crossing and Suntra Way. 34-18 4-23-2018 Approves declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions for 33 Innovation Park and to direct the filing at the Union County Recorder's Office of said declaration to be an encumbrance against the real property described in the declaration.  
TABLE F - GRADES AND CURB LINES 
Ord. No. Date Description 130 4-8-15 North Main St. from Bridge over Mill Creek to north corporation line. 144 3-9-16 Ash St. between Sixth and Seventh Sts. 150 4-13-16 Cottage St. between Fourth and Sixth Sts. 151 4-13-16 Wall Alley between Fifth and Sixth Sts. 239 6-22-22 West Third St. from Maple St. and Mulberry St; Mulberry St. from the center of West Third St. to West Fourth St. 364-A 10-4-35 Parts of East Fifth St., Cherry St. and Columbus Ave. 375 9-10-36 Portions of North Main and East Fourth Sts. 399 4-13-39 Cedar St. 403 10-12-39 West Sixth St. 718 9-10-64 Setback line: Lot No. 1319; Oakwood Terrace Addition. 27-82 6-24-82 City property on Raymond Rd. and Oakdale Cemetery zoned B-1.  
TABLE G - CHANGE OF STREET NAME 
Ord. No. Date Description 15 2-19-1883 Certain streets. 43 2-25-09 Certain streets. 519 8-28-52 Yarrow Street to Mulberry Court in Yarrington-Danis Addition. 815-69 2-27-69 Changing Watkins Rd. to Fifth St. 494-74 3-28-74 Changing Hardin Court to Hardin Place. Res. 516-76 3-25-76 Naming Monarch Court. 61-90 12-19-90 The continuation of Stocksdale Dr. east of St. Rt. 38 to Morey Dr.  
TABLE H - ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY 
Ord. No. Date Description 521 9-25-52 Connolly - Delaware Ave. for 8.89 acres. 531 8-13-53 Connolly - Delaware Ave. for .42 acres. 5631/2 5-11-56 Connolly - Cherry St. for 13.23 acres. 567 9-27-56 Stricker - Collins Ave. for 7.90 acres. 572 12-13-56 Barr - Collins Ave. for 18.977 acres. 573 12-13-56 Schery - Hickory Rd. for 9.881 acres. 619 10-27-60 Zitzman - Collins Ave. for 0.640 acres. 647 11-9-61 Barr Addition No. 3 for 0.639 acres. 649 11-9-61 Stricker et al. for 6.81 acres. 656 3-8-62 Lewis Trailer Court for 7.79 acres. 6621/2 6-28-62 Connolly - Hamilton, on Collins Ave. for 10.86 acres. 686 10-24-63 Pool and Disposal Plant. 689 11-26-63 Barr Addition No. 4 for 46.155 acres. 713 6-25-64 Lewis Trailer Court for 9.47 acres. 721 12-29-64 Thorpe - Delaware Ave. for 23.276 acres. 723 1-14-65 Harris - Five points for 1.88 acres. 724 1-14-65 Yarrington - North of Pool for 10.34 acres. 725 1-28-65 Stocksdale - London Ave. for 5.332 acres. 732 4-8-65 Stocksdale - London Ave. for 0.570 acres. 791-67 12-28-67 Application of Marysville Exempted Village Board of Education for 96.39 acres in Paris Twp. 803-68 8-22-68 Application of Coleman for 47.082 acres in Paris Twp. 804-68 8-22-68 Application of Streng for 0.497 acres in Paris Twp. 805-68 8-22-68 Application of Lewis for 12.392 acres. 826-69 10-9-69 Application of Hill, Roley and Penn Central Railroad for 6.745 acres in Paris Twp. 831-69 11-13-69 Application of Graves for 7.24 acres in Paris Twp. 837-70 1-8-70 Application of Fox and Stillings. 842-70 4-23-70 Appliation of Case for 6.97 acres in Paris Twp. 846-70 8-13-70 Application of R. K. Koltenbah et al for 1.32 acres in Paris Twp. 848-70 9-11-70 Application of Hendel for 4.472 acres in Paris Twp. and part of Amrine Mill Rd. (County Highway 133). 875-71 9-23-71 Application of Cecil Rausch et al. for 158.85 acres in Paris Twp. 901-72 8-10-72 Application of Hill Distributing Co. et al. for 96.305 acres in Paris Twp. 903-72 8-24-72 Application of R. R. Connolly et al. for 0.858 acres in Paris Twp. 906-72 9-14-72 Application of J.M. & N., Inc. for 76.65 acres in Paris Twp. 915-73 1-11-73 Application of Hendel & Assoc., Inc. for land in Paris Twp. near Waldo Rd. 941-74 2-28-74 Application of Coleman for 34.1357 acres in Paris Twp. 956-74 12-12-74 Application of Ellsworth L. Ohnsman et al. for 15.929 acres in Paris Twp. 965-75 5-8-75 Application of Union-Hankins Realty Corp. (79.574 acres) and Hendel and Associates, Inc. (26.3 acres) totaling 114.9 acres in Paris Twp. 970-75 9-25-75 Application of Kathryn Lambert et al. for 37.4614 acres in Paris Twp. 1001-77 10-27-77 Application of Lewis for 18.2 acres in Paris Twp. 1015-78 5-25-78 Application of Lewis and Penn Central Railroad for 7.106 acres in Paris Twp. 1016-78 5-25-78 Application of Lewis and Ennal, Inc. for 140.064 acres in Paris Twp. 1046-79 5-24-79 Accepting annexation of 33.65 acres belonging to Rockhold. 1049-79 6-14-79 Accepting annexation of 146.355 acres belonging to Donna M. Kreamer, et al. 1057-79 11-8-79 Accepting annexation of 135.376 acres belonging to John J. Perrini et al. 15-81 4-23-81 Annexation application of Marysville Packing Co. for 25 acres in Paris Twp. 17-81 5-14-81 Annexation application of Omega Oil Co. for 0.91 acres in Paris Twp. 11-83 2-24-83 Annexation application of Grace Williams and others for 26.063 acres in Paris Twp. 36-83 5-12-83 Application of Owen H. Thorpe for 6.558 acres in Paris Twp. 53-84 12-13-84 Application of Hill Distributing Co. et al. for 226.50 acres in Paris Twp. 54-84 12-13-84 Application of Rowland A. Rausch for 63.95 acres in Paris Twp. 13-86 3-26-86 Application of Nestle Foods Corp. for 2.57 acres in Paris Twp. 13-87 4-9-87 Application of Square Properties Ltd. for 1.988 and 0.097 acres in Paris Twp. 29-87 8-27-87 Application of American Legion Union Post No. 79 for 19.30 acres, the American Legion Park, in Paris Twp. 36-87 10-8-87 Application of Burl Hill, Jr. for 1.194 acres in Paris Twp. 25-88 11-10-88 Annexation petition of T.P. Treasure for 408.631 acres in Paris Twp. 33-88 12-8-88 Annexation petition of T. Feucht for 55.033 acres in Paris Twp. 10-89 2-23-89 Annexation petition of D.A. Kopech for 261.126 acres in Paris Twp. 11-89 3-9-89 Annexation petition of C.J. Call for 50.11 acres lying along Greenwood Colony in Paris Twp. 11-90 3-22-90 Annexation petition of R. & D. Cotton for 6.4 acres in Paris Twp. 25-90 7-12-90 Annexation petition of D. J. Niederkohr for 16.477 acres in Paris Twp. 29-90 8-9-90 Annexation petition of D. Schulze for 237.157 acres in Paris Twp. 51-90 11-20-90 Annexation petition of M. Overall for 292.567 acres along Marysville-Milford Ctr. Rd. 41-91 6-27-91 Annexation petition of H.W. Smith, Jr. for 1581.8316 acres in Paris Twp. 7-94 2-28-94 Annexation petition of Don W. Fraser for 9.248 acres in Paris Twp. 19-94 5-26-94 Annexation petition of Dennis Schulze for 7.365 acres in Paris Twp. 24-96 4-25-96 175.035 acres located west of State Route 31 and north of Mill Valley Subdivision. 27-96 5-23-96 382.756 acres and Lots numbered 1-22 and Lots numbered 25-36 in the Fleetwood Park Subdivision. 26-98 4-23-98 75.910 acres located on the west side of State Route 38 at State Route 736 and south of Timberview Golf Course. 42-98 7-9-98 2,880 acres contiguous with the south and southeast existing corporation line and commonly known as the Timber Trails/Industrial Parkway Area. 60-98 9-24-98 117.4 acres west of State Route 4 and north of Philip Herre Road. 5-99 3-25-99 Annexation of 235 acres, more or less, west of State Route 31 and north of The Woods at Mill Valley Subdivision, belonging to Coleman/Whitney Family Partnership. 47-00 5-25-00 Annexation of 54.14 acres located west of State Route 31 belonging to Lloyd and Margaret Helmuth. 15-02 4-25-02 Annexation of 16.7 acres along the southerly right-of-way of County Home Road and the easterly line of Woodview Park Subdivision. 16-02 4-25-02 Annexation of 8.4 acres along the northerly right-of-way of Glen Ellyn Drive and the easterly right-of-way of State Route 31. 51-03 11-20-03 Annexation of 145 acres in Paris Township. 11-05 3-21-05 Annexation of 3.8 acres in Paris Township. 22-05 5-12-05 Annexation of 4.1020 acres in Paris Township. 39-05 6-23-05 Annexation of 9.8 acres in Paris Township. 41-05 7-14-05 Annexation of 87.692 acres in Darby Township. 42-05 7-14-05 Annexation of 3.8 acres in Paris Township. 58-06 8-10-06 Annexation of 2.830 acres in Paris Township. 105-06 12-7-06 Annexation of 114.007 acres in Paris Township. 12-07 2-22-07 Annexation of 114.007 acres in Paris Township. 24-07 4-26-07 Annexation of 171.531 acres in Paris Township. 35-07 6-14-07 Annexation of 114.007 acres in Paris Township. 47-07 8-23-07 Annexation of 171.531 acres in Paris Township. 16-16 5-28-16 Annexation of certain territory containing 6.45 acres in Paris Township. 12-17 2-27-2017 Annexation of certain territory containing 31.396 acres in Paris Township.  
TABLE I - ZONING MAP CHANGES 
Ord. No. Date Description 809-68 11-26-68 Rezoning Lots 397 and 398 from "A" Residence to "B" Commercial District. 821-69 6-12-69 Rezoning 1.934 acres owned by Ellsworth Ohnsman et al., from "B" Commercial to "C" Industrial District. 824-69 9-11-69 (a) 96.07 acres annexed by Ord. 791-67 zoned "A" Residence District. (b) 47.082 acres annexed by Ord. 803-68 zoned "A" Residence District. (c) 0.497 acres annexed by Ord. 804-68 zoned "B" Commercial District. (d) 12.392 acres annexed by Ord. 805-68 zoned "B" Commercial. 828-69 10-23-69 6.745 acres annexed by Ord. 826-69 zoned "D" Apartment House District. 838-70 1-22-70 (a) 7.25 acres annexed by Ord. 831-69 zoned "B"Commercial District. (b) 1.42 acres annexed by Ord. 837-70 zoned "B" Commercial District. 841-70 4-9-70 Rezoning 14.184 acres adjacent to Milford Ave. from "B" Commercial to "C" Industrial District. 843-70 5-14-70 Rezoning Lots 1029, 1030 and 1031 in the Lakeview Addition from "A" Residence to "D" Apartment House District. 847-70 8-27-70 1.32 acres annexed by Ord. 846-70 zoned "D" Apartment House District. 861-71 5-13-71 Rezoning property belonging to Coleman from "A" Residence to "D" Apartment House District and "B" Commercial District. 862-71 5-13-71 Rezoning 3.999 acres belonging to Marilyn Shearer and 1.92 acres belonging to Richard Holycross, in vicinity of Milford Ave. and Stocksdale Dr., from "A" Residence District to "D" Apartment House District. 893-72 4-13-72 (a) 56.14 acres of Cecil Rausch, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "C" Industrial District. (b) 48.24 acres of Edwin Ellinger, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "A" Residence District. (c) 5.5 acres of August Rausch, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "A" Residence District. (d) 48.38 acres of Carl Ellinger, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "B" Commercial District. 897-72 6-22-72 5.5 acres of August Rausch, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "A" Residence District. 898-72 6-22-72 48.24 acres belonging to Edwin Ellinger, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "A" Residence District. 899-72 6-22-72 48.38 acres of Carl Ellinger, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "B" Commercial District. 900-72 7-13-72 56.14 acres beloning to Cecil Rausch, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "D" Apartment House District. 902-72 8-24-72 56.14 acres of Cecil Rausch, annexed by Ord. 875-71, zoned "B" Commercial District; repeals Ord. 900-72. 904-72 9-14-72 Zoning newly annexed Lots 6, 8, 9 and 10 in Revised Millbrook Subdivision No. 1 belonging to Ned Blessing as "A" Residence. 905-72 9-14-72 Zoning part of land annexed by Ord. 901-72 as follows: 30.550 acres for residential; 22.824 acres for apartment use; 8.50 acres for commercial use. 907-72 9-28-72 0.858 acres of R. R. Connolly et al. on Milford Rd. zoned "D" Apartment House District. 946-74 5-23-74 Rezoning land owned by Coleman from "A" Residence District to "B" Commercial District. 963-75 3-13-75 McKitrick property between East 4th St. and East 5th St. zoned "B" Commercial District. 964-75 3-13-75 3.5 acres of Argo property on London Ave. from "A" Residence District to "B" Commercial District. 966-75 5-8-75 Lots 1617 through 1690 in Greenwood Colony Subdivision zoned "A" Residence District and Lots 1615 and 1616 zoned "B" Commercial District. 1006-78 2-9-78 Coleman property being 37.29 acres fronting on Milford Rd. from R-1 Low Density Residential to R-2 Medium Density Residential District. 1008-78 2-23-78 18.2 acres belonging to Lewis as annexed by Ord. 1001-77 zoned B-1 Service Business District. 1017-78 5-25-78 91.589 acres belonging to Union Hankins Realty Corp. presently zoned R-2 rezoned as follows: 5.98 acres located north and west of Millcreek zoned R-3 and 85.609 acres zoned M-2 District. 1021-78 6-22-78 140.064 acres belonging to Lewis and Ennal, Inc. as annexed by Ord. 1016-78 zoned R-2 Medium Density Residential District. 1025-78 7-13-78 7.106 acres belonging to Lewis and Penn Central Railroad as annexed by Ord. 1015-78 zoned B-1 Service Business District. 1032-78 10-12-78 Tract of 25 acres belonging to Square Properties Ltd., bounded on east by east line of V.M.S. 3351 and on west by U.S. Route 33 Bypass from M-2 Heavy Manufacturing to B-1 Service Business District. 1039-78 12-14-78 Extending boundary of B-1 Zoning District on the William L. Coleman property to a line 90 feet south of its present boundary which is the centerline of the existing ditch. 1042-79 1-11-79 Property owned by Suburban Centers, Inc. and Penn Central Corporation on Eighth St. between Plum and Oak Sts. from M-1 to B-R (Business-Residential) District. 1056-79 10-11-79 54.1 acres of Hill Distributing Co. fronting on Collins Rd. and S. R. 4 zoned from R-1 to R-2; 7.8 acres of Hill Distributing Co. fronting on Collins Rd. and S. R. 4 zoned from R-1 to B-1 District. 1063-79 11-20-79 Rezoning 6.10 acres belonging to Robert Lewis at al. fronting on Delaware Ave. from B-1 to M-1 District. 1064-79 11-20-79 Zoning 12.819 acres belonging to Perrini, Fox and Agler Investment Co. fronting on W. 5th St. as B-1 District. 1081-80 6-26-80 3.021 acres at Elwood and Maple Sts. owned by Hendel and Associates, Inc. from B-1 to BR District. 1083-80 7-10-80 10.12 acres owned by Coleman on Milford Ave. from B-1 to R-3 District. 1085-80 8-28-80 Zoning Rockhold property annexed by Ordinance 1046-79: 14.684 acres as B-1 and 18.966 acres as M-1 District. 1097-80 12-11-80 Zoning part of the Perrini property annexed by Ordinance 1057-79: 42.844 acres as B-1 and R-2. 3-81 1-22-81 Eaches property at 117 N. Maple St. from R-2 Medium Density Residential to B-R Business District. 4-81 1-22-81 Kroger Shopping Center being 17.426 acres of newly annexed Angler Investment Co. property on W. Fifth St. zoned B-1 Service Business District. 8-81 3-12-81 7.8 acres of Hill Distributing Co. at Collins Rd. and SR4 from B-1 Service Business to R-2 Medium Density Residential District. 23-82 6-24-82 Property of Omega Oil Station, Kreakbaum, Linzinmeir, Feucht and Davis zoned B-1. 24-82 6-24-82 Property of Brown Packing, Connolly Construction and Kasper zoned M-2. 25-82 6-24-82 Limes property south of Conrail property on Raymond Rd. zoned B-1. 26-82 6-24-82 Property of White, Brumbaugh, Mills and Amerine zoned B-1. 27-82 6-24-82 City property on Raymond Rd. and Oakdale Cemetery zoned B-1. 28-82 6-24-82 Property of Miller, Foursquare Gospel Church and Catholic Cemetery on Raymond Rd. zoned B-1. 29-82 6-24-82 Limes property north of Conrail property on Raymond Rd. zoned R-2. 30-82 6-24-82 Hendel property south of Mill Creek zoned R-2. 31-82 6-24-82 Kreamer property zoned R-2. 57-83 8-25-83 6.558 acres of recently annexed land zoned R-3. 13-84 3-29-84 5.10 acres on west side of Milcrest Dr., from B-1 to R-3. 42-85 7-25-85 Kauffman property zoned R-2. 43-85 7-25-85 Ohio Reformatory for Women zoned A-R. 44-85 7-25-85 City Park, McCarthy and Hendel, zoned R-2. 45-85 7-25-85 Marysville Mobile Home Park property zoned R-3. 46-85 7-25-85 Nazarene Church and Williams property zoned A-R. 17-86 4-24-86 1.08 acres of vacant land, VMS No. 3351, on Delaware Ave. from M-1 to B-1. 22-86 7-10-86 0.918 acres at Plum and Fourth Sts., from M-2 to B-3. 45-86 11-13-86 2.57 acres of Nestle Co. property on London Ave. zoned R-2. 26-87 7-9-87 141.155 acres of Lewis property on State Rte. 38, from R-2 to B-1, R-3 and R-2. 32-87 9-10-87 1.988 and 0.097 acres belonging to Square Properties Ltd. zoned B-1. 47-87 12-22-87 American Legion Park, zoned R-1. 4-88 3-10-88 3.20 acres of Perrini property on W. Fifth St., from R-2 to R-3. 5-88 3-10-88 5.14 acres of Perrini property on W. Fifth St., from R-2 to B-1. 1-89 1-12-89 9.336 acres owned by O.M. Scott & Sons Co. at Third and Maple Sts. from M-1 to R-3. 6-89 1-26-89 267 acres owned by Harbour Development Co., known as McKitrick property, to R-2. 8-89 1-26-89 3.093 acres on Third St. owned by the Church of Jesus Christ Latter Day Saints from M-1 to R-2. 13-89 4-13-89 33.947 acres adjacent to Greenwood Colony to R-2. 15-89 4-13-89 36.439 acres located off Square Dr. to B-1. 16-89 4-13-89 8.578 acres located off Square Dr. to B-1. 17-89 4-13-89 29.76 acres west of St. Rt. 31 and south of U.S. Rt. 33 to R-3. 18-89 4-13-89 8.743 acres located on St. Rt. 31N to B-1. 19-89 4-13-89 10.72 acres located on St. Rt. 31N to B-1. 20-89 4-13-89 44.79 acres located on St. Rt. 31N to B-R. 21-89 4-13-89 6.0 acres located on St. Rt. 31N to B-1. 22-89 4-27-89 2.361 acres on W. Fifth St. to B-R. 23-89 4-27-89 41.644 acres south of W. Fifth St. to R-1. 30-89 6-8-89 Property in Timberview Subdivision on St. Rt. 38 from R-3 to R-2. 34-89 7-13-89 1.194 acres on Kenny Lane to R-2. 36-89 7-27-89 Lots 51, 52, 53 and 54 on Chestnut St. from M-1 to R-2. 43-89 11-9-89 Property at 120 N. Maple St. from R-2 to B-R. 8-90 3-8-90 Property on N. Maple St. from R-3 to B-1. 26-90 7-12-90 6.457 acres located on Watkins Rd. to B-1. 36-90 8-23-90 2.25 acres located on London Ave. to HMD. 37-90 8-23-90 6.325 acres located on Delaware Ave. from M-2 to B-1. 9-91 2-28-91 11.134 acres located on Milford Ave. to R-1. 10-91 2-28-91 29.165 acres located on Milford Ave. to R-2. 11-91 2-28-91 7.286 acres located on Milford Ave. to R-3. 12-91 2-28-91 5.175 acres located on Milford Ave. to B-R. 15-91 3-28-91 2.560 acres located on the NE corner of St. Rts. 38 and 736 from R-1 to B-1. 16-91 3-28-91 1.737 acres located on the NE corner of St. Rts. 38 and 736 from R-1 to B-1. 17-91 3-28-91 12.711 acres located on the NE corner of St. Rts. 38 and 736 from R-1 to B-1. 23-91 4-25-91 10.593 acres located on the NE corner of St. Rts. 38 and 736 from R-1 to R-3. 24-91 4-25-91 49.022 acres located on the NE corner of St. Rts. 38 and 736 from R-1 to R-2. 42-91 7-25-91 Lot 1790 in Timberview Subdivision from R-3 to R-2. 43-91 7-25-91 Part of lots 295 and 296 located at the corner of 4th and Maple Sts. from R-2 to B-R. 47-92 12-10-92 8.896 acres north of U.S. 36 at Watkins Rd. from M-1 to TOC. 48-92 12-10-92 24.313 acres north of U.S. 36 at Watkins Rd. from B-1 to TOC. 49-92 12-10-92 11.639 acres north of U.S. 36 at Watkins Rd. from B-1 to R-5. 17-93 5-13-93 Approving the official Zoning Map as amended. 31-93 8-12-93 Williams property north of Fleetwood from A-R to R-3 and R-2. 32-93 8-26-93 7.155 acres north of Timberview Golf Course; south of Windsor Manor; and between St. Rts. 4 and 38 from R-5 to R-4. 37-93 9-23-93 Approves revised official zoning map. 45-93 11-23-93 Marysville Church of the Nazerene property at 1126 N. Maple St. from A-R to R-2. 8-94 3-10-94 40.8 acres belonging to Liberty Partnership located at the southwest corner of State Route 31 and 33 from R-5 and B-1 to R-3, R-5 and B-1. 22-94 6-23-94 9.248 acres belonging to Greg Nelson zoned TOC. 23-94 6-23-94 7.365 acres belonging to Borror Corp. zoned R-2. 2-95 1-26-95 13.391 acres belonging to Joe Call and located in Greenwood Colony from R-5 to R-2. 4-96 1-25-96 14 acres, more or less, belonging to Phillip Connolly and located in Green Pastures from TOC to R-3. 23-96 4-25-96 28.745 acres belonging to Kass/Call Corp., Milford Estates, located at Milford Ave. and State Route 4 from TOC to R-3. 25-96 5-23-96 4.95 acres belonging to Connolly Construction Co. located in Green Pastures from TOC to B-1. 28-96 5-23-96 138.768 acres and 4.641 acres recently annexed land belonging to Coleman/Whitney Family Partnership zoned R-2 and B-R respectively. 40-96 7-25-96 34 acres located at 1309 Milford Ave. through 1457 Milford Ave. zoned R-2. 53-96 9-26-96 16.4 acres located on the north of Hanhart property zoned R-2. 54-96 9-26-96 95.6 acres located south of property rezoned by Ordinance 53-96 zoned R-3. 55-96 9-26-96 27.8 acres located north of U.S. 33 and south of Ohio Grain Land zoned R-4. 56-96 9-26-96 97 acres located north of U.S. 33 between Waldo Road and proposed R-3 and R-4 parcels zoned R-2. 80-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Harold and Anita Kleiber at 733 North Maple St. from Paris Township zoning to R-5. 81-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Richard and Denise Scott at 951 North Maple St. from Paris Township zoning to B-1. 82-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Helen Poling at 1000 North Maple St. from Paris Township zoning to O-R. 83-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Donald and Priscilla McCoy at 718-B North Main St. from Paris Township zoning to R-5. 84-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Franke's Wood Products at 720 North Main St. from Paris Township zoning to M-1. 85-96 12-12-96 Property known as Union County Fairgrounds at 845 North Main St. from Paris Township zoning to TOC. 86-96 12-12-96 Property known as Fleetwood Park Subdivision from Paris Township zoning to R-1. 87-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Ohio Grain at 17700 State Route 4 from Paris Township zoning to B-1. 88-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Robert and Sara Hatcher located at 733 Waldo Road from Paris Township zoning to A-R. 89-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Clarence and Mary Snodgress located at 750 Waldo Road from Paris Township zoning to R-2. 90-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Marysville Church of Christ, located on State Route 31, north of Woods at Mill Valley from Paris Township zoning to R-2. 91-96 12-12-96 Property owned by James and Ann Cross, Imo and Charles Navin located on State Route 4 south of Ohio Grain from Paris Township zoning to R-4. 92-96 12-12-96 Property owned by Noshir and Sandra Deboo located on the corner of Maple St. and Elmwood Ave. from Paris Township zoning to R-4. 7-97 2-27-97 3.975 acres belonging to Connolby Construction Co. in Green Pastures along Emmaus Road from B-1 to R-4. 43-97 8-13-97 3.452 acres belonging to Ingram Funeral Home and S. Richard Scott from B-1 to O-R. 47-97 7-24-97 4.1 acres belonging to Discon Services, Inc. located immediately west of existing Taylor Plant zoned M-1. 57-97 10-23-97 1.310 acres belonging to Greg Nelson, Nelson Auto Group from R-5 to TOC. 9-98 1-22-98 2.751 acres, more or less, belonging to Deboo Family Limited Partnership from R-4 to R-5. 10-98 1-22-98 1.65 acres located at 375 and 386 Taylor Ave. from R-1 to O-R. 11-98 1-22-98 10.003 acres belonging to Marysville Church of Christ from R-2 to O-R. 30-98 5-14-98 52.51 acres belonging to the City located south and west of 445 North Maple St. from R-1 to A-R. 37-98 6-25-98 7.79 acres known as Shepherd's Landing and located west of Emmaus and east of Altersgate Park from R-4 to PUD. 76-98 12-10-98 Recently annexed property, located east of Weaver Road, from Paris Township U-1 to City M-1. 77-98 12-10-98 Recently annexed property, located at Scottslawn and Watkins Roads from Paris Township M-2 to City TOC. 78-98 12-10-98 Recently annexed property, located at Scottslawn and Watkins Roads from Paris Township M-2 to City B-R. 79-98 12-10-98 Recently annexed property located in the area of SR 33, Industrial Parkway and Scottslawn Road, from Paris Township M-2 to City M-2. 80-98 12-10-98 Recently annexed property, located south of O.M. Scott Properties and north of Scottslawn Road from Paris Township, U-1 to City M-2. 87-98 12-22-98 Property belonging to Donald and Judith Teets located at 116 N. Maple St. from O-R to B-R. 88-98 12-22-98 Three acres, more or less, belongings to Charles J. Call, located in Greenwood Colony from R-5 to R-2. 89-98 12-22-98 117.4 acres belong to BWA Investment Limited, located at State Route 4 and Philip Herre Road, from Paris Township, B-2 to City A-R. 90-98 12-22-98 Recently annexed property, located east of State Route 38 and west of Weaver Road from Paris Township U-1 to R-2. 91-98 12-22-98 Recently annexed property, located between Weaver Road and State Route 736, from Paris Township U-1 to City A-R. 92-98 12-22-98 Recently annexed property, located south of Boerger Road from Paris Township R-1 to City A-R. 93-98 12-22-98 Recently annexed property, located east of Weaver Road, from Paris Township U-1 to M-1. 2-99 1-28-99 Recently annexed property, located in Timber Trails/Boerger Road Area from Paris Township R-1 to City R-1. 11-99 4-22-99 Revises the official zoning map of the City. 14-99 5-27-99 234.602 acres belonging to Coleman/Whitney Family Partnership, located on State Route 31 North of the Woods at Mill Valley from U-1 to R-2. 26-99 8-26-99 Eljis Park, 502 E. Ninth St. and 520 S. Walnut St. belonging to Industrial Recovery Capital Co. of Ohio, Mrs. Cletos Todd and Dale Van Brimmer from M-2 to R-2. 32-99 9-23-99 17.5 acres, more or less, belonging to Dr. Francis Barnes, located to the west of Timberview Development, from A-R to R-1. 33-99 9-23-99 37.2 acres, more or less, belonging to Dr. Francis Barnes, located east of Milford Ave. and south of Kenny Lane from A-R to R-2. 91-00 11-21-00 64 acres more or less, belonging to Dominion Homes Inc./Lloyd and Margaret Helmuth located north of the Woods at Mill Valley, from Township to R-2 City Zoning. 93-00 11-21-00 1.72 acres at 17974 Timber Lane Rd. from A-R to R-1. 40-01 10-25-01 0.169 acres belonging to Connolly Construction Co. from R-4 to B-1. 13-02 4-11-02 0.579 acres belonging to Heart of Ohio Title Co. from R-4 to B-1. 38-02 8-22-02 8.4 acres along the northerly right-of-way of Glen Ellyn Drive and the easterly right-of-way of State Route 31, from Paris Township Zoning District B-2 to City B-R. 39-02 8-22-02 16.7 acres belonging to the Marysville Board of Education from Paris Township Zoning District U-1 to City A-R. 7-03 2-27-03 .945 acres along the westerly right-of-way of State Route 31 from R-2 to O-R. 42-03 10-16-03 12.522 acres located east of Connolly St. at the end of Surrey Lane from R-2 to TOC. 43-03 10-16-03 .482 acres east of Ninth St., south of Scioto Valley Janitorial from M-2 to B-1. 44-03 10-16-03 48 acres bordered on the northeast by State Route 33 from M-2 to SD-1. 4-04 2-12-04 45.111 acres located at the southwest corner of Boerger Road and S.R. 38 from A-R to S-R. 26-04 5-27-04 Approves PUD application for Walker Meadows on 45.111 acres just north of the Timber Trails Subdivision. 2-05 1-27-05 45.33 acres located on State Route 38 at the junction of State Route 736 from A-R to S-R. 4-05 2-10-05 60.495 acres located at 14180 State Route 38 from A-R to S-R. 17-05 4-14-05 18.240 acres located on Weaver Road from U-1 Township zoning to S-R. 21-05 5-12-05 41.376 acres located at 1475 West Fifth St. from A-R to TOC. 48-05 8-25-05 4.102 acres located on State Route 38 (Gallogly Property) from Township Zoning to S-R. 51-05 9-22-05 10 acres more or less located at 17720 and 17740 State Route 4 from Township zoning to O-R. 58-05 11-3-05 3.762 acres located between the north side of the Scott Farms Subdivision and County Home Road from Township Zoning to R-2. 59-05 11-3-05 Three parcels totaling 9.177 acres located on Coleman's Crossing Blvd. from M-2 to SD-1. 60-05 11-3-05 6.665 acres located at the northeast corner of Coleman's Crossing Blvd. and Industrial Parkway from M-2 to SD-1. 70-05 11-17-05 Approves the revised Official Zoning Map. 17-06 5-25-06 49.3 acres on Weaver Road from A-R to R-1 and R-2. 32-06 6-22-06 Four parcels located on the south side of Morey Drive from split zoning of HMD and B-1 to B-1. 54-06 8-10-06 The Northwoods Subdivision from O-R to R-2. 55-06 8-10-06 The southwest portion of Parcel No. 290019062000 located along Mill Road from O-R to B-R. 56-06 8-10-06 87.692 acres located on Boerger/Southhard Road from Township zoning to A-R. 76-06 8-24-06 6.4 acres located on State Route 4 from O-R to S-R. 88-06 10-26-06 2.830 acres located on Coleman's Crossing Blvd., behind the Shoppes of Marysville Plaza from Township Zoning to TOC. 18-07 4-12-07 1.01 acres located at 428 and 504 E. Fourth St. from B-1 and R-2 to B-R. 30-07 5-24-07 Redraws the zoning district boundaries, AR/SR of the proposed Galbury Meadows Subdivision. 31-07 5-24-07 1 acre, more or less, located near the intersection of State Route 38 and Walker Woods Lane from AR to R-1. 15-08 5-8-08 114.007 acres at State Route 4 and Southard Road from Township Zoning (TWP) to Government Use District (GOV). 1-09 1-22-09 Rezones Parcels 290009020103, 290009021000, 280009020002, 290009020001, 290009020300, 290009020104 (140.34 acres) at State Route 4 North and County Home Road from Township Zoning (TWP) to Government Use District (GOV). 13-11 5-12-11 1.06 acres on the corner of Taylor Avenue and North Main Street from R-5 High Density Multi-Family Residential Zoning to OR Office Residential District. 28-12 5-10-12 Parcels (in whole or part thereof) 290001377001, 290001389000, 290001390100, 290001391000 totaling 4.834 acres, more or less, generally located between Milford Avenue, S. Maple Street, Collins Avenue and Grove Street; from B-1 (Service Business District) and R-2 (Medium Density Residential District) to M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District). 39-12 7-12-12 Rezones 16710 Square Drive (Parcel 290016010200) totaling 3.0 acres, more or less, from TOC (Traffic Oriented Commercial) to M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District). 42-13 11-21-13 Rezones Parcels 2900230550000, 2900230561000, 2900230560000, 2900230732000 totaling 130.25 acres, more or less, generally located along Industrial Parkway; from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing) to SD-1 (Special District One). 58-13 12-19-13 Rezones Parcels 2900050791000 and 2900051210000 located at 454 North Maple Street; from R-2 (Medium-Density Residential) to B-R (Business Residential). 2-14 1-23-14 Parcels 2900110280000, 2900110290000, 2900100190000, and 2900100200000 from B-1 (Service Business District) to B-R (Business Residential District). 3-14 1-23-14 Parcels 2900100100000, 2900100120000, 2900100130000, 2900100140000, 2900100080010, 29001000080000, 290008098000, 2900081060000, 2900081020000 and 2900081040000, from B-1 (Service Business District) to B-3 (Central Business District). 66-14 9-11-14 Rezones Parcel 2900240370000 located at 980 North Maple Street; from OR (Office-Residential) to B-1 (Service Business). 95-14 12-18-14 Rezones Parcel 2099921401040 (173 Professional Parkway) from B-1 (Service Business) to R-5 (High Density Multi-Family) and Parcel 2900021401030, 2900021401020 and 2900021401010 (203-243 Professional Parkway) from or (Office-Residential) to R-5 (High Density Multi-Family). 42-15 11-19-15 Rezones Parcels 2900051220000, 2900051210000, 29000051200000, 29000508600000, 2900051190000, and 2900050791000 located on West Maple Street from Business Residential (BR) to Special District One (SD1). 5-16 3-10-16 Rezones Parcels 2900044110020 and 2900044110070 located on Coleman's Crossing Boulevard from Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC) to Hospital Medical District (HMD). 27-16 7-25-16 6.3 acres (Parcel # 2900030720000) from High Density Single Family Residential (R-3) to Hospital Medical District (HMD) on property located at the southeast corner of Walnut Street and Professional Parkway. 29-16 8-8-16 Parcel 2700170331000 located on Watkins Road to Traffic Oriented Commercial (TOC). 59-16 12-20-16 19.428 acres (Parcel # 2900191220000) from High-Density Multi-Family Residential District (R-5), Medium Density Single Family District (R-2), and Low Density Single Family Residential District (R-1) to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) on property located south of Lora Lee Drive and adjacent to the existing Milford Crossing Apartment Development. 51-17 9-25-2017 Amends development plan at the exisiting Planned Unit Development (PUD) of the Village at Timber Lakes, located at property on Milford Avenue (Parcels # 2900191210000 and 2900191200000). 52-17 10-9-2017 Rezone +/- 24,384 acres (parcel #2900250030010) from Medium Density Single Family Residential District (R-2) to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) on property located at the northwest corner of SR 31 and Creekview Drive. 56-17 10-23-2017 Rezone +/-107 acres (Parcel # 2900031230000, 2900230110000, 29000031220000, 2900031200010, and 2900230300000) from Special District One (SD1) to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) on property located at the southwest corner of Dunham Street and Columbus Avenue for a Mixed-Use Development (Woodside). 57-17 10-23-2017 Rezone +/-121 acres (Parcel # 2900300480000 and 2900300560000) on Weaver Road from Light Manufacturing (M-1) to Heavy Manufacturing (M-2). 2-18 1-8-2018 Rezone +/- 68.31 acres (Parcel # 2900190480030 and 2900190480010) from an exisiting Planned Unit Development (PUD) to a proposed new Planned Unit Development (PUD) on property located at the northeast corner of SR 38/London Avenue and Boerger Road. 6-18 1-22-2018 Amends the City Zoning Map. 7-18 1-22-2018 Amends the City Zoning Map. 8-18 1-22-2018 Amends the City Zoning Map. 9-18 1-22-2018 Amends the City Zoning Map. 10-18 1-22-2018 Amends the City Zoning Map.  
CODE SECTION TABLE - 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code as supplemented through 1-3-2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 1994 Code as supplemented not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Date Section this Code 18 4-2-03 541.09 29 1-23-09 1305.03 291 6-28-28 905.04, 905.05 472 3-27-47 311.04, 351.06, 351.09, 351.11 629 2-9-61 945.01, 945.08 677 6-13-63 945.08 683 9-24-63 353.11 709 5-14-64 709.01-709.12, 709.14, 709.15 711 5-28-64 717.01, 717.04 714 6-25-64 713.01, 713.02(a), (c), 713.03 730 2-11-65 945.01, 945.08 731 3-25-65 701.01, 701.02, 701.06 745 7-22-65 941.03 752 12-16-65 123.01 759 5-12-66 509.08(a), (b) 760 5-12-66 521.12(a)-(c) 771-66 12-8-66 141.01(a), (b), (d)-(i), 141.03, 141.06, 141.09, 141.11, 141.12, 141.14 785-67 11-30-67 339.02, 505.09(a), (b), 545.21(a), 725.01, 725.02, 725.06 792-68 2-22-68 925.03, 925.04, 925.07 874-71 9-9-71 141.19 920-73 3-8-73 353.06 924-73 5-24-73 141.17 944-74 5-9-74 373.09(b), 373.10 959-75 1-23-75 127.01 Res. 507-75 12-11-75 105.01, 105.03-105.07 988-76 11-23-76 553.04(a), (b) 1000-77 10-27-77 375.03, 375.04 1005-77 12-8-77 1121.01-1121.04, 
1125.01, 1125.04, 1125.05, 1125.11, 1125.12, 1125.99, 
1127.01-1127.10, 
1129.02-1129.04(a)(4), 1129.07, 1129.11, 1129.13(b), 1129.14, 
1129.16-1129.20, 
1129.22-129.26, 
1131.01-1131.07, 1131.09, 1131.10, 1131.12, 1131.13, 1133.01, 1133.03, 
1139.01-1139.14, 
1141.01-1141.14, 
1145.01-1145.17, 
1145.20-1145.23, 1145.25-1145.29, 1147.01, 
1147.03-1147.07, 
1149.02-1149.05 1007-77 12-8-77 721.01, 721.04, 721.08, 
721.10-721.13, 721.17, 721.19, 
721.21-721.26, 
721.29-721.35, 
721.37-721.43, 721.99 1026-78 7-13-78 1101.01, 1101.02, 1103.01, 1103.02, 
1103.04-1103.07, 1105.01, 1105.02, 1105.07, 
1105.08(a)(1), (2), (5)-(17), 
1105.09(a)(1)-(3), (6), 1105.10, 
1105.17(a)(1)-(4), (6), (7), (9)-(14), 
1105.18-1105.21, 1107.01-1107.06, 1107.08, 
1107.09(a)(2)-(5), 1107.10-1107.15, 1107.17-1107.19, 1109.02-1109.06, 
1109.08(a)(1), (2), 1109.09, 1109.11-1109.14, 1109.18-1109.21, 1111.01-1111.15, 1113.01-1113.03, 
1113.06(a)(2)-(4), 1113.07, 1113.99, 1115.01-1115.03, 1115.06 1030-78 9-28-78 941.07 1040-78 12-14-78 313.11 1044-79 2-8-79 1109.15(b), (c) 1055-79 10-11-79 141.01(c), 141.13, 141.99 1075-80 4-24-80 1105.08(a)(3), (4), 1105.09(a)(4), (5), 1105.17(a)(5), (8), 1107.07(a), (b), (d), 1109.07, 1109.08(a)(3), 1109.10, 1109.16, 1113.06(a)(1) 1086-80 8-28-80 941.04(b), (d), (f), 941.08 1087-80 8-28-80 1309.01, 1309.02 1089-80 8-28-80 373.12-373.20 1094-80 11-13-80 351.15 7-81 2-26-81 1503.01-1503.06, 1503.99 19-81 5-28-81 925.05(a), (d), (e) 33-82 7-8-82 313.11 40-82 9-9-82 141.01(j) 42-82 9-9-82 925.05(b), (c) 44-82 9-23-82 705.03 46-82 10-28-82 705.01, 705.02 2-83 1-13-83 905.01-905.03 7-83 1-10-83 135.01-135.04 8-83 2-10-83 1103.03, 
1105.04-1105.06, 1105.11, 1105.111, 1105.13-1105.15, 1113.04(a) 9-83 2-10-83 945.09 12-83 2-24-83 941.01, 941.04(a) 15-83 3-10-83 1125.02, 1125.03, 1125.06-1125.10 19-83 3-24-83 701.04, 701.07 24-83 4-14-83 717.03 25-83 4-14-83 701.03 26-83 4-14-83 717.06 27-83 4-14-83 713.02(b) 28-83 4-14-83 925.02 43-83 5-12-83 1501.06, 1501.99 52-83 7-28-83 1143.01-1143.06, 1143.08, 1143.09(a)-(g), 1143.10-1143.15, 1143.90, 1143.99 63-83 10-27-83 1107.09(a)(1) 65-83 10-27-83 1113.04(b) 4-84 1-26-84 1131.11 10-84 3-22-84 925.01(a), (b), (d), (e) 20-84 5-10-84 925.06 22-84 5-10-84 137.01-137.03 23-84 5-24-84 925.08 24-84 5-24-84 353.01, 353.02, 353.04, 353.05, 353.07-353.10 28-84 6-14-84 945.06, 945.07 33-84 8-23-84 1309.04, 1309.99 55-84 12-13-84 161.03 56-84 12-13-84 353.13 60-84 12-27-84 373.01 62-84 12-27-84 1303.01-1303.03, 1303.99 1-85 1-10-85 509.03 2-85 1-10-85 129.01-129.03 3-85 1-24-85 1139.21(a)(2)-(c) 50-85 8-22-85 1131.08 51-85 8-29-85 127.02 55-85 10-10-85 901.01-901.09, 901.99 31-86 8-28-86 1127.06 34-86 10-9-86 130.01-130.03 42-86 10-23-86 133.01 3-87 2-12-87 1129.06 4-87 2-12-87 1129.13(a) 5-87 2-12-87 1129.15 6-87 2-12-87 1129.21 9-87 2-26-87 1313.01-1313.17, 1313.99 11-88 5-26-88 1100.01, 1100.02(a)-(f) 14-88 7-28-88 1100.03 15-88 7-28-88 1107.16 16-88 7-28-88 1109.01 21-88 9-22-88 131.01 32-88 12-8-88 925.015 7-89 1-26-89 127.03 26-89 5-25-89 925.05(f) 38-89 9-14-89 921.03 50-89 12-28-89 351.99 13-90 3-29-90 729.01-729.16, 729.99 15-90 4-26-90 521.13 35-90 8-23-90 1143.09(h) 59-90 12-13-90 141.20 3-91 1-24-91 1129.04(a)(5) 13-91 2-28-91 921.01, 921.02(a)-(g), 921.03-921.16(d), 921.17-921.33, 921.99 20-91 4-11-91 128.01 25-91 5-9-91 1139.15-1139.19 28-91 5-23-91 935.01-935.06 36-92 11-30-92 951.01, 951.02 44-91 7-25-91 1100.02(g), 1107.06(c), 1109.15(a), 1139.20, 1139.21(a)(1), 1143.07, 1147.02, 1149.01 47-91 8-12-91 107.01 52-91 12-12-91 941.04(c), (e), 941.05 53-91 12-26-91 1136.01-1136.06(c), 1136.07-1136.11, 1136.99 6-92 3-12-92 141.01(k)-(r), 141.02, 141.04, 141.05, 141.07, 141.08, 141.18 24-92 8-27-92 925.01(c) 46-92 12-10-92 1143.09(a)-(g), 1143.10, 1143.15, 1143.90 3-93 1-28-93 1136.06(d) 14-93 5-13-93 1123.01 15-93 5-13-93 1135.01-1135.17 16-93 5-13-93 1137.01-1137.03, 1137.10, 
1137.12-1137.16, 
1137.20-1137.22, 
1137.25-1137.27, 
1137.30-1137.32, 1137.40 21-93 6-24-93 1129.12 27-93 7-8-93 921.02(h) 30-93 8-12-93 1105.22 33-93 9-9-93 921.16(e) 34-93 9-9-93 945.05 35-93 9-23-93 930.01-930.11 36-93 9-23-93 931.01-931.04, 931.06(b)-(f), 931.07 5-94 2-24-94 132.01 21-94 4-14-94 1137.30(a) 28-94 8-25-94 931.05 35-94 10-13-94 1501.01-1501.05 40-94 10-27-94 125.01, 125.02 45-94 11-10-94 1109.08(a)(4) 46-94 11-10-94 1109.17 47-94 11-10-94 931.06(a) Adopting Ordinance 101.01-101.08, 
101.99, 105.02, 121.01, 121.02, 123.02, 
125.03-125.04, 127.04, 133.02, 141.10, 161.01, 161.02, 
301.01-301.52, 
303.01-303.11, 303.99, 
305.01-305.08, 
311.01-311.03, 311.99, 
313.01-313.10, 313.99, 
331.01-331.43, 331.99, 
333.01-333.09, 333.99, 
335.01-335.14, 335.99, 337.01-337.29, 337.99, 339.01, 
339.03-339.11, 
341.01-341.06, 341.99, 
351.01-351.05, 351.07, 351.08, 351.10, 
351.12-351.14, 353.03, 353.12, 
371.01-371.11, 
373.02-373.08, 373.09(a), 373.11, 
375.01-375.06, 375.99, 501.01-501.12, 501.99, 
505.01-505.08, 505.09(c), 
505.10-505.14, 509.01, 509.07, 509.08(c), 
513.01-513.13, 513.99, 
517.01-517.09, 
521.01-521.11, 512.12(d), 
525.01-525.14, 
529.01-529.08, 
533.01-533.15, 
537.01-537.18, 
541.01-541.08, 545.01-545.20, 545.21(b), 
549.01-549.09, 
553.01-553.03, 
557.01-557.04, 701.05, 701.99, 705.99, 709.13, 709.99, 713.99, 717.02, 717.05, 717.99, 721.02, 721.03, 
721.05-721.07, 721.09, 
721.14-721.16, 721.18, 721.20, 721.27, 721.28, 721.36, 
725.03-725.05, 725.99, 905.99, 941.02, 941.06, 945.02-945.04, 945.99, 1105.03, 1113.05, 1115.04, 1115.05, 1129.01, 1129.05, 1133.02, 1145.18, 1145.19, 1145.24, 1301.01, 1305.01, 1305.02, 1309.03, 
1511.01-1511.05, 1511.99, 
1519.01-1519.05, 1519.99 4-95 2-9-95 351.16 14-95 4-11-95 351.99 15-95 4-11-95 921.03 25-95 6-29-95 930.02(k), 931.06(g) 26-95 6-29-95 921.02(i), 925.02(d) 34-95 7-27-95 925.02(a)-(c) 38-95 8-10-95 1100.01-1100.03 39-95 8-10-95 1105.04 40-95 8-10-95 1105.06 41-95 8-10-95 1105.14 42-95 8-10-95 1139.21(c) 44-95 9-14-95 1105.11 45-95 9-14-95 1105.20 48-95 9-28-95 1129.01-1129.26 1-96 1-11-96 303.99, 333.07, 335.07, 341.01, 351.04, 513.08, 525.01, 525.02, 525.05, 525.11, 525.15, 529.01, 529.03, 529.04, 529.06, 529.07, 537.07, 537.14, 537.15, 541.06, 549.07 39-96 7-25-96 1143.01-1143.20, 1143.99 51-96 9-26-96 139.01, 139.02 52-96 9-26-96 131.01(a) 60-96 10-10-96 1313.01-1313.17, 1313.99 61-96 10-24-96 1317.01, 1317.02 66-96 11-14-96 921.02(i) 104-96 12-19-96 303.99, 331.15, 333.03, 333.10, 333.99, 335.11, 335.99. 337.22, 337.99, 509.011, 509.03, 
513.01-513.06, 513.08, 513.13, 513.99, 517.05, 517.06, 525.01, 525.02, 525.08, 525.09, 533.01, 533.02, 533.04, 533.07, 533.091, 533.12, 533.14, 
537.01-537.06, 537.15, 537.17, 541.02, 545.03, 
545.05-545.10, 
545.13-545.15, 
545.17-545.19, 549.02 15-97 3-27-97 1135.07 19-97 5-8-97 1140.01-1140.11 25-97 6-12-97 1123.01 26-97 6-12-97 1125.01-1125.12, 1125.99 27-97 6-12-97 1131.01-1131.13 28-97 6-12-97 1135.01-1135.17 29-97 6-12-97 1137.01-1137.40 30-97 6-12-97 1141.01-1141.13 31-97 6-12-97 1143.21 32-97 6-12-97 373.10(c) 35-97 6-26-97 1139.01-1139.22 36-97 6-26-97 1149.01-1149.04 45-97 7-24-97 513.14 1-98 1-8-98 301.27, 303.041, 331.21, 331.39, 331.99, 335.09, 337.10, 337.16, 337.22, 337.27, 501.01, 513.01, 513.03, 513.07, 513.10, 513.11, 517.02, 525.05, 525.09, 529.07, 537.03, 537.12, 537.14, 537.15, 545.01, 545.07, 549.07, 549.10, 
1519.01-1519.05 34-98 5-28-98 1142.01-1142.12 53-98 7-23-98 1139.23 75-98 12-10-98 1139.23(c) 98-98 12-22-98 335.03, 335.99, 339.07, 341.02, 373.21, 509.06, 509.07, 513.01, 513.03, 513.04, 513.09, 513.10, 513.12, 525.01, 525.08, 525.09, 525.11, 533.01, 533.06, 537.03, 537.10, 537.15, 541.07, 545.05, 545.13 27-99 8-26-99 1135.07 28-99 8-26-99 1137.16(d) 1-00 1-13-00 331.35, 331.38,333.031, 335.031, 335.07, 335.99, 351.04, 
375.01-375.08, 501.01, 501.05, 509.03, 537.03, 537.051, 537.10, 541.07, 545.01, 545.02, 545.05, 545.06, 545.08, 545.10, 545.14, 545.15, 545.18, 545.22, 549.10 14-00 2-10-00 121.03 24-00 3-10-00 121.04 34-00 4-27-00 122.01 40-00 5-11-00 123.01 61-00 7-27-00 931.05(d) 68-00 8-10-00 733.01-733.19, 733.99 69-00 8-24-00 1100.02(b)(9) 83-00 10-26-00 1502.01-1502.06 90-00 11-21-00 141.01-141.21, 141.99 92-00 11-21-00 1123.01(b), 1137.26(a), 1139.24, 1143.06(f) 1-01 3-11-01 303.082, 303.083, 333.01, 333.99, 337.02, 337.18, 337.24, 337.30, 339.03, 375.03, 501.04, 501.07, 501.09, 505.01, 505.14, 509.03, 509.05, 513.03, 513.05, 513.06, 513.08, 513.12, 525.03, 525.07, 525.12, 529.07, 533.03, 533.06, 537.02, 537.051, 537.07, 553.01, 553.011, 1519.02, 1519.03 6-01 2-8-01 133.01(a) 9-01 3-8-01 925.02, 931.04, 931.06 10-01 3-22-01 737.01-737.20 11-01 3-22-01 941.01-941.13 13-01 3-22-01 925.01, 925.05 14-01 3-22-01 931.02, 931.03, 931.07 20-01 4-26-01 925.05(d) 21-01 4-26-01 931.02(b) 23-01 5-10-01 1137.29(a) 25-01 6-14-01 1100.03 32-01 7-26-01 141.05, 141.22 33-01 7-26-01 353.01-353.07 34-01 7-26-01 351.99(e) 43-01 11-20-01 132.01 44-01 12-13-01 337.20(c) 48-01 12-13-01 945.05 1-02 1-10-02 301.20, 335.08, 335.09, 337.27, 337.99, 375.08, 513.01, 513.12, 525.01, 525.02, 525.08, 525.15, 525.16, 529.07, 533.05, 537.03, 537.05, 537.051, 537.06, 537.16, 537.17, 537.18, 549.07, 1519.02, 1519.03 6-02 2-28-02 1100.01-1100.03, 1101.01, 
1103.01-1103.07, 
1104.01-1104.07, 1104.99, 
1105.01-1105.23, 
1115.01-1115.05 17-02 4-25-02 373.10 21-02 6-13-02 1107.07(c), 1109.15(a), 1123.01(b)(142), 1135.021, 1135.022,1137.09, 1137.11, 1139.20, 1139.21, 1143.07, 1143.15(a)(1), 1143.16(a) 22-02 6-13-02 133.01(a) 30-02 7-11-02 737.06(a)(1), 737.07 32-02 7-25-02 1140.01-1140.11 34-02 7-25-02 123.04 35-02 7-25-02 143.01 40-02 8-22-02 1137.21(b) 41-02 8-22-02 1137.22(a) 49-02 9-12-02 941.06(b)(6), (8), (11), 941.09 50-02 9-12-02 Repeals 521.12, 557.01, 557.02, 1139.06; 
Enacts 1319.01-1319.15, 1319.99 60-02 10-24-02 351.21 71-02 12-5-02 521.12 81-02 12-19-02 941.09 1-03 1-9-03 301.51, 371.12, 371.99, 375.08, 501.01, 501.99, 509.03, 509.05, 509.06, 509.07, 513.01, 525.08, 529.01, 529.02, 529.021, 529.07, 533.01, 533.02, 533.04, 533.05, 537.051, 537.14, 537.16, 537.18, 545.22 2-03 1-23-03 Ch. 135 
Editor's Note 13-03 4-10-03 111.01 14-03 4-10-03 925.02, 931.06 17-03 5-22-03 107.01 22-03 7-10-03 951.01, 951.02 30-03 9-11-03 351.22, 351.99 38-03 10-9-03 937.01-937.23, 937.99 46-03 11-6-03 1109.15(a), 1123.01(b)(142), 1135.18, 1137.19, 1139.20, 1143.17 47-03 11-6-03 1139.25 48-03 11-6-03 1143.18 49-03 11-6-03 1144.01-1144.11 53-03 12-4-03 141.01-141.19 59-03 12-4-03 Repeals 137.01-137.03, 921.25 63-03 12-18-03 1136.06(e) 64-03 12-18-03 905.03 69-03 12-18-03 2003 Replacement Pages 7-04 2-26-04 123.05 17-04 4-8-04 1137.01(d), 1137.09, 
1137.11-1137.14 22-04 4-22-04 Ch. 110 23-04 5-13-04 109.01,109.02 33-04 8-12-04 1100.01, 1100.02, 1136.06(e), 1144.06(b) 34-04 8-12-04 1145.07 42-04 9-8-04 931.03, 931.04, 931.06 47-04 9-8-04 937.17(d) 10-14-04 1143.03(c)(10), 1143.10 49-04 10-14-04 1143.03(10), 1143.10 51-04 10-28-04 Repeals 941.08 55-04 11-18-04 141.01-141.18 58-04 12-2-04 301.201, 303.08, 333.01, 333.02, 333.07, 335.01, 335.03, 501.04, 501.99, 509.02, 509.05, 
513.01-513.08, 513.12, 529.021, 
529.03-529.05, 529.07, 533.01, 533.09, 533.11, 537.02, 537.021, 537.03, 537.051, 537.07, 537.09, 537.14, 537.15, 541.04, 541.05, 549.01, 549.02, 549.04, 549.10 65-04 12-16-04 141.06(f), 141.08(c), 141.16 1-05 1-13-05 1144.06(a) 13-05 4-14-05 1105.13 14-05 4-14-05 1105.03, 1105.04, 1105.041 15-05 4-14-05 1113.02 16-05 4-14-05 Deletes Plat Approval Flow Chart 23-05 5-12-05 901.08(a) 24-05 5-12-05 941.10 30-05 5-26-05 921.01-921.33, 921.99 46-05 Repeals 921.25 47-05 7-28-05 311.05, 371.06 52-05 9-22-05 1135.02, 1135.021, 1135.022, 1135.03, 1135.04, 1135.05, 1135.08(b) 53-05 9-22-05 505.11 56-05 10-13-05 925.01 71-05 11-17-05 937.17(c) 72-05 11-17-05 945.01-945.09, 945.99 81-05 12-15-05 739.01 84-05 12-15-05 931.02(a), (b) 2-06 2-9-06 1137.09-1137.32 3-06 2-9-06 1105.02 4-06 2-9-06 313.12, 331.38, 331.40, 337.27, 337.28, 341.01, 341.02, 341.03, 341.05, 375.01, 501.05, 517.01, 517.06, 517.08, 517.09, 517.14, 525.02, 525.15, 533.07, 537.17, 545.01, 545.05, 545.06, 545.09, 545.22 8-06 2-23-06 1145.01-1145.23 14-06 4-27-06 931.06 18-06 5-25-06 1129.05, 1129.07, 1129.18, 1129.25 19-06 5-25-06 1136.01-1136.14 20-06 5-25-06 1140.01-1140.10 22-06 5-25-06 1100.01-1100.03 23-06 5-25-06 1125.09 26-06 5-25-06 Repeals Ch. 133 28-06 6-8-06 931.06(a) 33-06 6-22-06 925.01(e), 925.02(a) 34-06 6-22-06 925.02(a) 35-06 6-22-06 931.06(c) 37-06 6-22-06 127.03, 127.04 38-06 6-22-06 110.01 39-06 6-22-06 1501.01-1501.06, 1501.99 49-06 6-22-06 1503.05 57-06 8-10-06 1100.01 59-06 8-10-06 105.02(d), 111.01(b) 66-06 8-24-06 1105.09 67-06 8-24-06 1109.18 68-06 8-24-06 1139.23 69-06 8-24-06 1142.04 70-06 8-24-06 1143.15 71-06 8-24-06 1137.25(n) 72-06 8-24-06 1123.01 73-06 8-24-06 1143.17(a) 74-06 8-24-06 1143.20 75-06 8-24-06 1143.19(a) 86-06 10-12-06 110.01 90-06 11-16-06 139.01, 139.02 91-06 11-16-06 1301.01 1-07 1-11-07 331.01, 331.07, 331.14, 333.01, 333.04, 337.29, 373.01, 373.02, 
373.05-373.07, 501.06, 513.01, 513.03, 513.04, 513.08, 513.12, 513.15, 525.15, 525.17, 529.02, 529.07, 529.08, 533.01, 533.06, 537.07, 541.11, 545.01, 545.05, 549.11 3-07 1-25-07 925.02 4-07 1-25-07 931.06 7-07 2-22-07 1143.18(e) 8-07 2-22-07 1135.19, 1137.23 9-07 2-22-07 1109.16 22-07 4-17-07 931.02 29-07 5-24-07 1144.03 40-07 8-9-07 313.02, 313.11, 333.03, 337.10 44-07 8-23-07 1136.01-1136.14 45-07 8-23-07 1144.01-1144.12 46-07 8-23-07 1123.01 49-07 10-11-07 1139.05 50-07 10-11-07 1123.01 63-07 11-15-07 1143.16 64-07 11-15-07 1137.23 65-07 11-15-07 539.01 67-07 11-15-07 1319.05 1-08 1-10-08 1110.01-1110.04, 1110.99 2-08 1-10-08 721.01-721.09, 721.99 13-08 4-24-08 1144.03 14-08 4-24-08 108.01-108.05 17-08 6-26-08 921.02(k), 925.02(c) 18-08 7-10-08 120.01 20-08 7-10-08 738.01-738.06, 738.99 36-08 10-23-08 1144.01-1144.12 37-08 10-23-08 1129.13 38-08 10-23-08 1129.21 39-08 10-23-08 1123.01(b)(163) 40-08 10-23-08 1139.04 41-08 10-23-08 1135.19 42-08 10-23-08 1137.23(a) 44-08 11-6-08 1139.03 46-08 11-6-08 1313.01-1313.43, 1313.99 55-08 12-4-08 937.17(c) 56-08 12-4-08 945.02(b), 945.05 4-09 2-26-09 301.19, 333.01, 335.05, 335.072, 337.26, 339.11, 373.02, 501.06, 509.06, 513.01, 517.01, 517.15, 525.02, 529.07, 537.08, 549.01, 549.02, 549.04, 1511.01, 
1511.03-1511.05 15-09 5-14-09 Pt. 11, Title One 16-09 5-14-09 1103.02 17-09 5-14-09 1104.01, 1104.03, 1104.04, 1104.06, 1104.07 18-09 5-14-09 1105.01, 1105.03-1105.08, 
1105.10-1105.17, 
1105.20-1105.23, 
repeals 1105.09, 1105.111, 1105.18, 1105.19 19-09 5-14-09 1107.01-1107.16, 1107.18, 1107.19 20-09 5-14-09 1109.01-1109.03, 1109.05, 
1109.07-1109.18 21-09 5-28-09 713.01-713.09, 713.99 25-09 6-11-09 Chap. 110, Sec. 2, 921.99, 930.99, 931.05(d), repeals 373.17 33-09 9-10-09 925.05 37-09 11-19-09 738.01-738.06, 738.99 45-09 12-17-09 Ch. 110 4-10 2-11-10 1100.01 5-10 2-11-10 937.01-937.23, 937.99 6-10 2-11-10 938.01-938.07, 938.99 7-10 2-11-10 939.01-939.19 10-10 2-25-10 301.04, 301.321, 303.082, 303.10, 331.38, 333.01, 333.03, 333.031, 335.01, 335.02, 335.031, 335.05, 335.07, 335.10, 
337.02-337.06, 337.08, 
337.10-337.17, 
337.19-337.22, 337.24, 337.26, 337.27, 341.03, 351.04, 375.05, 517.01, 525.02, 525.03, 525.05, 533.06, 537.02, 537.03, 537.14, 537.15, 541.05, 545.01, 545.05, 545.09, 549.04. 549.07 11-10 2-25-10 Ch. 110 15-10 5-27-10 1123.01 16-10 5-27-10 1139.21 17-10 5-27-10 1145.01-1145.21 18-10 5-27-10 Ch. 110 20-10 6-24-10 141.03 21-10 6-24-10 141.03 23-10 7-22-10 925.01 35-10 12-2-10 1136.01-1136.14 1-11 1-27-11 1143.10 5-11 2-24-11 333.01, 333.031, 335.01, 335.02, 335.07, 335.072, 335.10, 335.12, 335.13, 337.28, 337.29, 501.99, 517.01, 517.02, 517.06, 517.07, 529.07, 537.10, 537.11, 537.14, 537.15, 1519.04 7-11 3-10-11 921.01, 921.16(e), 921.20(d)(7), 921.31(d)(2), 925.015 8-11 3-10-11 733.01-733.19, 733.99 14-11 5-12-11 925.02(a), 931.06(a) 15-11 5-12-11 931.02(c) 17-11 6-9-11 107.01 18-11 6-23-11 931.05(d) 22-11 7-28-11 1100.01-1100.03 23-11 7-28-11 1136.09(a) 24-11 7-28-11 1143.01-1143.21, 1143.99 25-11 7-28-11 925.01(c) 26-11 7-28-11 931.02(a) 28-11 8-25-11 1144.071 29-11 8-25-11 1144.05 30-11 7-5-11 1150.01-1150.06 31-11 9-8-11 141.06(f)(2), 141.12(d), 925.08(c), 931.01(k) 32-11 9-8-11 140.01-140.06 44-11 12-15-11 1319.05 1-12 1-5-12 1140.01-1140.10 2-12 1-5-12 1105.08 4-12 2-9-12 333.01, 335.01, 335.02, 335.05, 335.06, 
335.07-335.074, 
335.12-335.14, 337.22, 351.04, 501.01, 501.02, 501.13, 501.99, 509.06, 509.07, 513.03, 517.05, 525.01, 525.02, 529.07, 537.10, 537.12, 541.02, 545.02, 545.04, 545.05, 
545.07-545.10, 545.13-545.15, 545.17, 545.18, 549.04 5-12 2-9-12 141.03, 141.06 6-12 2-9-12 931.01, 931.02 8-12 2-23-12 1101.02 9-12 2-23-12 1104.05 10-12 2-23-12 1105.03 11-12 2-23-12 1105.13 12-12 2-23-12 1107.16(b)(1) 13-12 2-23-12 1107.16(c)(2) 14-12 2-23-12 1109.18 15-12 2-23-12 1113.04(a) 16-12 2-23-12 1113.04(b) 17-12 2-23-12 1136.07 18-12 2-23-12 1137.02 19-12 2-23-12 1137.22(a) 20-12 2-23-12 1137.22(n) 21-12 2-23-12 1144.04 22-12 2-23-12 1144.06 23-12 2-23-12 1145.10 24-12 3-22-12 1136.09 27-12 5-10-12 125.05 32-12 6-28-12 1137.19 33-12 6-28-12 1141.01-1141.13 34-12 6-28-12 1143.03, 1143.06, 1143.11, 
1143.16-1143.20 41-12 9-13-12 311.06 43-12 10-11-12 722.01-722.16, 722.99 44-12 11-1-12 925.02, 931.06 45-12 11-1-12 925.05 46-12 11-1-12 925.01 53-12 11-15-12 1140.02 54-12 11-15-12 1140.04 55-12 11-15-12 1140.08 56-12 12-20-12 1123.01 57-12 12-20-12 1137.25(n) 58-12 12-20-12 1137.32(a), (b) 59-12 12-20-12 1137.26(a), (b) 60-12 12-20-12 1137.27(h), (i) 61-12 12-20-12 1137.30(h), (i) 62-12 1-10-13 1137.31 (h), (i) 63-12 12-20-12 1137.32(h), (i) 1-13 1-10-13 1319.07, 1319.08, 2-13 1-10-13 140.02 5-13 1-24-13 1144.072 6-13 1-24-13 1144.05 7-13 2-28-13 1137.27(a) 8-13 2-28-13 301.031, 301.161, 301.17, 301.181, 301.26, 301.361, 
301.45-301.47, 303.01, 303.041, 303.99, 
313.03-313.06, 331.12, 333.11, 335.032, 335.07, 335.072, 335.074, 337.01, 337.09, 337.18, 337.23, 337.29, 339.01, 339.03, 339.06, 339.07, 339.08, 341.05, 501.11, 505.001, 505.01, 505.13, 505.14, 513.12, 513.121, 529.021, 529.04, 529.07, 533.08, 533.09, 549.10, 1511.05 9-13 3-14-13 1143.06 10-13 3-14-13 1143.19 11-13 3-14-13 1129.17 14-13 4-11-13 Ch. 110 16-13 4-25-13 1319.05 17-13 4-25-13 901.01-901.19 19-13 4-25-13 941.04, 941.06, 941.09 21-13 6-13-13 515.01-515.05, 515.99 22-13 6-27-13 1101.02 23-13 6-27-13 1105.23 24-13 6-27-13 1105.24 25-13 6-27-13 1141.04 26-13 6-27-13 1143.03 27-13 6-27-13 1143.06 28-13 6-27-13 1143.16 29-13 6-27-13 1143.17 35-13 8-8-13 559.01-559.04, 559.99 36-13 10-10-13 515.01-515.04, 515.99 38-13 11-7-13 1319.01-1319.09, 1319.99 39-13 11-7-13 1320.01-1320.07, 1320.99 40-13 11-21-13 1137.19(k) 41-13 11-21-13 1137.20(j) 47-13 11-21-13 Repeals 921.02(k), 925.02(c) 49-13 11-21-13 925.01(c) 50-13 11-21-13 931.02(a) 53-13 12-5-13 1143.171 54-13 12-5-13 1143.03 56-13 12-5-13 900.01, 
901.01-901.18, 901.99, 
921.01-921.28, 921.99, 
925.01-925.08, 925.99, 
930.01-930.10, 930.99, 
931.01-931.07, 
937.01-937.23, 937.99, 
945.01-945.07, 945.99 59-13 12-19-13 1150.02 60-13 12-19-13 1150.07-1150.10 61-13 12-19-13 931.02 1-14 1-23-14 1129.27 4-14 2-27-14 Repeals 1501.04 5-14 2-27-14 921.02, 925.02 6-14 3-13-14 301.04, 313.03, 333.03, 333.11, 335.032, 339.01, 339.03, 341.01, 341.03, 351.04, 373.02, 513.01, 513.03, 517.01, 517.02, 
517.06-517.11, 517.13, 517.15, 537.03, 537.12, 545.05, 545.18, 549.01, 549.02, 549.04 7-14 3-13-14 1139.26 8-14 3-13-14 1143.17 9-14 3-13-14 1143.171 10-14 3-13-14 1144.08 12-14 4-10-14 105.03, 105.04, 105.06 14-14 4-10-14 1141.04 15-14 4-10-14 1143.03 16-14 4-10-14 1143.09(b)(11) 17-14 4-10-14 1143.09(a)(3) 18-14 4-10-14 1143.09(b)(12) 19-14 4-10-14 1143.09(b)(13) 22-14 5-8-14 937.18 23-14 5-8-14 931.05 25-14 5-22-14 1105.04 26-14 5-22-14 1105.06 27-14 5-22-14 1105.08 28-14 5-22-14 1105.14 29-14 5-22-14 1105.17 30-14 5-22-14 1125.02 31-14 5-22-14 1129.10 32-14 5-22-14 1129.13 33-14 5-22-14 1129.21 34-14 5-22-14 1131.04 35-14 5-22-14 1136.07 36-14 5-22-14 1136.10 37-14 5-22-14 1144.05 38-14 5-22-14 1144.06 39-14 5-22-14 1145.11 40-14 5-22-14 1145.15 41-14 5-22-14 1150.05 42-14 5-22-14 1150.08 46-14 7-10-14 1143.171 47-14 7-10-14 1143.20 51-14 7-10-14 1143.19 52-14 7-10-14 1143.18 53-14 7-10-14 1143.17 54-14 7-10-14 1143.16 55-14 7-10-14 1143.091 56-14 7-10-14 1143.09 57-14 7-10-14 1143.08 58-14 7-10-14 1100.02 64-14 9-11-14 1140.07 65-14 9-11-14 1135.17 67-14 9-25-14 931.04 71-14 10-23-14 931.05 72-14 11-6-14 351.03(n), 351.99(f) 78-14 11-20-14 937.18 79-14 11-20-14 925.01 93-14 12-4-14 931.02 96-14 12-18-14 931.04 97-14 12-18-14 931.06(a) 98-14 12-18-14 931.06(b) 2-15 2-12-15 Ch. 110 4-15 2-12-15 303.04, 333.01, 333.03, 333.031, 337.16, 337.17, 351.03, 351.04, 505.071,525.01, 525.02, 525.05, 529.01, 529.07, 533.09, 533.14, 537.03, 537.05, 537.051, 537.06, 537.12, 537.16, 537.17, 545.01, 545.02, 545.05, 545.15, 553.03 10-15 3-12-15 1135.32 11-15 3-12-15 1123.01 12-15 3-26-15 Ch. 110 13-15 3-26-15 529.07 19-15 6-25-15 135.01-135.04 20-15 7-9-15 Repeals 351.14 21-15 7-9-15 351.21 22-15 7-9-15 303.081, 303.082, 331.44, 335.072, 335.074, 501.07, 501.08, 549.01 26-15 8-27-15 Repeals Ch. 733 31-15 10-8-15 951.02 32-15 10-8-15 515.01-515.03 33-15 10-8-15 142.01-142.27, 142.97, 142.98, 142.99 34-15 10-22-15 941.01-941.09 45-15 12-3-15 925.02, 930.01, 931.06 46-15 12-3-15 1319.09 48-15 12-3-15 1140.08 2-16 2-11-16 301.19, 303.081, 303.082, 335.031, 335.09, 335.10, 341.01, 341.03, 341.05, 341.06, 351.04, 373.02, 529.07 8-16 4-28-16 Ch. 110 13-16 4-28-16 1129.06 28-16 7-25-16 1123.01, 1137.10, 1137.21, 1137.22, 1137.25, 1137.26, 1137.30, 1137.32 30-16 9-12-16 925.03 31-16 9-26-16 1100.02 32-16 9-26-16 1100.02 33-16 9-26-16 1144.01-1144.12 34-16 9-26-16 1320.01-1320.09, 1320.99 41-16 10-24-16 1123.01 42-16 11-14-16 Repeals 951.02 43-16 11-14-16 1305.01-1305.03 44-16 11-14-16 1303.01-1303.03, 1303.99 46-16 11-14-16 945.04 54-16 12-12-16 Repeals Ch. 701 55-16 12-12-16 Repeals Ch. 705 56-16 12-12-16 Repeals Ch. 725 58-16 12-20-16 1137.13  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1994 Code as supplemented through January 2, 2017, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1994 Code as supplemented, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 2-17 1-23-2017 I(App. A)       Added 1100.04 5-17 2-13-2017 I(Exh. A) 351.03 6-17 2-13-2017 I 142.21 11-17 2-27-2017 I       Added 952.00-952.08, 952.99 13-17 2-27-2017 I 142.051(B)(1)(a) 19-17 3-27-2017 I(App. A)       Added 714.01-714.05, 
714.98, 714.99 21-17 4-10-2017 I 1319.02 1319.04(A)(3) 1319.07 1319.99 22-17 4-10-2017 I(App. A)       Dltd 717.01-717.06, 717.99       Added 717.01-717.06, 717.99 24-17 5-22-2017 I(App. A) 1100.01       Rpld 1100.02 32-17 7-24-2017 I       Added 741.01, 741.02, 741.99 50-17 9-11-2017 2(App. A) 1303.02(B) 55-17 10-23-2017 I 142.07(C)(1)(d) II 142.062(D)(1) III 142.10(C)(3) IV(Exh. A)       Added 142.22-142.36 66-17 12-11-2017 I(App. A) 1144.09(A)(4) 67-17 12-11-2017 I(App. A) 1144.10(A)(5) 68-17 12-11-2017 I(App. A) 1144.11(A)(2) 69-17 12-11-2017 I       Dltd 709.2-709.15       Added 709.1, 709.99 70-17 12-11-2017 I(App. A) 717.03 12-18 2-12-2018 I       Added 343.1, 343.2, 343.99 37-18 5-14-2018 I(App. A)       Dltd 714.01-714.05, 
714.98, 714.99       Added 714.01-714.05, 
714.98, 714.99 44-18 6-25-2018 I       Added 351.17.01 II       Rpld 303.09 46-18 7-9-2018 I       Dltd 713.01-713.09, 713.99 Table I       Added 713.01-713.11 3-18 1-8-2018 I(App. A)       Dltd 729.01-729.16, 729.99       Added 729.01, 729.02, 729.99 5-18 1-22-2018 I(App. A)       Dltd 1135.11 6-18 1-22-2018 I, II(App. A)       Dltd 1137.25       Added 1137.33-1137.36 7-18 1-22-2018 II(App. A)       Dltd 1137.25       Added 1137.33-1137.36 Table I 8-18 1-22-2018 II(App. A)       Dltd 1137.25       Added 1137.33-1137.36 Table I 9-18 1-22-2018 II(App. A)       Dltd 1137.25       Added 1137.33-1137.36 Table I 10-18 1-22-2018 I(App. A)       Dltd 1137.25       Added 1137.33-1137.36 Table I 11-18 2-26-2018 I(App. A) 931.01(K) 141.06(I) 26-18 4-9-2018 I(App. A) 941.10(B) 35-18 4-23-2018 I       Added 931.04(C)-(E) 36-18 5-14-2018 I(App. A) 1303.02 1303.03(A), (E) 38-18 5-21-2018 I(App. A)       Added 730.01-730.06, 730.99 39-18 6-25-2018 I(App. A) 931.06(A) 40-18 6-25-2018 I(App. A) 925.02(A) 41-18 6-25-2018 I(App. A)       Rpld 925.05(E)(2) II       Rnmb 925.05(E)(3), (4)       as 925.05(E)(2), (3) 47-18 7-9-2018 I(App. A) 1301.01 48-18 7-9-2018 I(App. A)       Dltd 1309.01-1309.04, 1309.99       Added 1309.01-1309.04, 1309.99 49-18 7-9-2018 I       Rpld 1317.01, 1317.02 60-18 11-13-2018 I 931.02(C) II 931.04(B) 61-18 11-13-2018 I 1100.01(B) II 1100.01(E) 67-18 11-26-2018 I(Exh. A) 937.18(C), (D) II(Exh. A) 945.04(A)  
