CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF POWELL, OHIO 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS
OF
POWELL, OHIO 
____________ 
Brian Lorenz 
Mayor 
Jon Bennehoof 
Vice Mayor 
Jim Hrivnak 
Frank Bertone 
Brendan Newcomb 
Tom Counts 
Daniel Swartwout 
Council Members 
____________ 
Stephen Lutz 
City Manager 
____________ 
Eugene Hollins 
Law Director 
____________ 
Karen J. Mitchell 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Powell, Ohio. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through January 1, 2016. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the decimal refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 101 is numbered 101.02, and the first section of chapter 502 is 502.01. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 575.06 and 575.07 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 575.061. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
(Index or Indexes) 
    The (index or indexes) (has or have) been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Director of Supplement Department, and Rachel Strength, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Karen Mitchell, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Powell, Ohio. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Powell, Ohio. 2017. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2016-48 Omitted 1 2016-49 Omitted 1 2016-50 Omitted 1 2016-51 Omitted 1 2016-52 Omitted 1 2016-53 Omitted 1 2016-54 Omitted 1 2016-55 Omitted 1 2016-56 Included 1 2016-57 Omitted 1 2016-58 Omitted 1 2016-59 Omitted 1 2016-60 Omitted 1 2016-61 Omitted 1 2016-62 Omitted 1 2016-63 Omitted 1 2016-64 Omitted 1 2016-65 Omitted 1 2016-66 Omitted 1 2016-67 Omitted 1 2016-68 Omitted 1 2016-69 Omitted 1 2017-01 Omitted 1 2017-02 Omitted 1 2017-03 Omitted 1 2017-04 Omitted 1 2017-05 Omitted 1 2017-06 Omitted 1 2017-07 Omitted 1 2017-08 Omitted 1 2017-09 Omitted 1 2017-10 Omitted 1 2017-11 Omitted 1 2017-12 Omitted 1 2017-13 Omitted 1 2017-14 Omitted 2 2017-15 Omitted 2 2017-16 Omitted 2 2017-17 Omitted 2 2017-18 Omitted 2 2017-19 Omitted 2 2017-20 Omitted 2 2017-20(Res.) Omitted 2 2017-21 Omitted 2 2017-22 Omitted 2 2017-22(Res.) Omitted 2 2017-23 Omitted 2 2017-24 Included 2 2017-25 Included 2 2017-26 Omitted 2 2017-27 Omitted 2 2017-28 Omitted 2 2017-29 Omitted 2 2017-30 Omitted 2 2017-31 Omitted 2 2017-32 Omitted 2 2017-33 Omitted 2 2017-34 Omitted 2 2017-35 Included 2 2017-36 Omitted 2 2017-37 Omitted 2 2017-38 Omitted 2 2017-39 Omitted 2 2017-40 Omitted 2 2017-41 Omitted 2 2017-42 Omitted 2 2017-43 Omitted 2 2017-44 Omitted 2 2017-45 Included 2 2017-46 Omitted 2 2017-47 Omitted 2 2017-48 Omitted 2 2017-49 Omitted 3 2017-50 Omitted 3 2017-51 Omitted 3 2017-52 Included 3 2017-53 Included 3 2017-54 Omitted 3 2017-55 Omitted 3 2017-56 Omitted 3 2017-57 Omitted 3 2017-58 Omitted 3 2017-59 Omitted 3 2017-60 Included 3 2017-61 Omitted 3 2017-62 Omitted 3 2017-63 Omitted 3 2017-64 Omitted 3 2017-65 Omitted 3 2017-66 Omitted 3 2017-67 Omitted 3 2017-68 Omitted 3 2018-01 Omitted 3 2018-02 Omitted 3 2018-03 Omitted 3 2018-04 Omitted 3 2018-05 Omitted 3 2018-06 Omitted 3 2018-07 Omitted 3 2018-08 Omitted 3 2018-09 Omitted 3 2018-10 Included 3 2018-11 Omitted 3 2018-12 Omitted 3 2018-13 Omitted 3 2018-14 Omitted 3 2018-15 Omitted 3 2018-16 Omitted 3 2018-08(Res) Omitted 4 2018-09(Res) Omitted 4 2018-12(Res) Omitted 4 2018-17(Res) Omitted 4 2018-18(Res) Omitted 4 2018-19 Omitted 4 2018-20 Omitted 4 2018-21 Omitted 4 2018-22 Omitted 4 2018-23 Omitted 4 2018-24 Included 4 2018-25 Omitted 4 2018-26 Omitted 4 2018-27 Omitted 4 2018-28 Omitted 4 2018-29 Omitted 4 2018-30 Omitted 4 2018-31 Omitted 4 2018-32 Omitted 4 2018-33 Omitted 4 2018-34 Omitted 4 2018-35 Omitted 4 2018-36 Omitted 4 2018-37 Omitted 4 2018-38 Omitted 4 2018-39 Omitted 4 2018-40 Included 4 2018-41 Omitted 4 2018-42 Omitted 4 2018-43 Omitted 4 2018-44 Omitted 4 2018-45 Omitted 4 2018-46 Omitted 4 2018-33 Omitted 5 2018-47 Omitted 5 2018-48 Omitted 5 2018-49 Included 5 2018-50 Included 5 2018-51 Omitted 5 2018-52 Omitted 5 2018-53 Omitted 5 2018-54 Omitted 5 2018-55 Omitted 5 2018-56 Omitted 5 2018-57 Omitted 5 2018-58 Omitted 5 2018-59 Omitted 5 2019-01 Omitted 5 2019-02 Omitted 5 2019-03 Omitted 5 2019-04 Omitted 5 2019-05 Omitted 5 2019-06 Omitted 5 2019-07 Omitted 5 2019-08 Omitted 5 2019-09 Omitted 5  
CHARTER OF THE VILLAGE OF POWELL, OHIO[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Powell, in order to secure and exercise the full powers of local self-government under the Constitution of the State of Ohio do enact and ordain this Charter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Powell Charter was approved by voters on November 7, 1989. Dates appearing in parenthesis following a section indicate those sections were subsequently amended, added or repealed on the date given. 

ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION-POWERS 

1.01 - INCORPORATION 
    The City previously existing as the Village of Powell under the laws of the State of Ohio shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Powell with the same boundaries, but with the powers and authority to change its boundaries and annex other territory contiguous thereto in any manner not prohibited by the general laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
1.02 - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
    The municipal government provided for in this Charter shall be known as the Council-City Manager form of government. 
(Amended 11-2-04) 
1.03 - POWERS 
    The City of Powell shall have all the powers of local self-government and the benefits of municipal home rule that may now or hereafter be lawfully possessed or exercised by municipal corporations under the Constitution and the laws of the State of Ohio. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, to the extent that the manner is not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council. When not prescribed in this Charter or by ordinance or resolution, then the powers shall be exercised in the manner as may now or hereafter be provided by the laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE II - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

2.01 - OATH OF OFFICE 
    Every elected or appointed officer and full-time employee of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of the office or employment, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the Clerk of Council: 
    "I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Ohio and will obey the laws thereof and that I will, in all respects, observe the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of this City, and will faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge the duties of _______, upon which I am about to enter." 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
2.02 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
    Council shall determine the officers and employees of the City whose duties require them to handle or be concerned with the management of its money or other property, and those officers and employees shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, furnish to the Clerk of Council a bond issued by a company authorized to do business in Ohio to protect the City against loss due to their acts and/or omissions. The amount of such bond shall, in each case, be determined by the Council. The premiums of such bonds shall be paid from funds of the City. Council may at any time require such officers and employees to give a new or additional bond. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
2.03 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to ethics and unlawful interests in a public contract shall apply to all elected and appointed officials and employees of the City, and to the appointees to the City's boards and commissions. In order to address any potential ethics or contract issue in the manner provided by law, such officials, employees and appointees shall disclose to the Law Director the potential issue and shall refrain from any deliberations, votes or any other participation in said matter prohibited by Ohio ethics law. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE III - EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY 

3.01 - EXECUTIVE POWER 
    The executive power of the City shall be vested in a Mayor, City Manager, Director of Finance, Police Chief, Director of Law and such other officers and departments as are created by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.02 - TERM OF MAYOR 
    At the first regular meeting of Council in even numbered years, Council by the concurrence of a majority of the members of Council shall choose one (1) of their number to be Mayor for a term of two (2) years ending on the 31st day of December in the year subsequent to election. If no Mayor shall be chosen on the day so appointed therefore, Council shall meet no later than 7:30 p.m. on the next day (not counting Sunday) and shall proceed to choose a Mayor. If, on such day, no person shall have been chosen Mayor before 9:00 p.m., Council shall elect a Mayor by lot. Immediately after selecting the Mayor, the Council shall in the same manner choose a Vice Mayor. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.03 - QUALIFICATIONS OF MAYOR 
    The Mayor of the City of Powell shall be chosen from the membership of the duly elected members of Council. 
(Amended 11-2-04; 5-7-13) 
3.04 - VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF MAYOR 
    Whenever the Mayor is temporarily incapacitated or absent, the Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of Mayor. In the event of any incapacitation or absence by the Mayor of more than sixty (60) days, or in the event the Mayor resigns from Council, dies or becomes permanently disabled, the office of Mayor shall be deemed to be vacant and the Vice Mayor shall then serve as the Mayor for the balance of the current Mayor's unexpired term. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.05 - COMPENSATION OF MAYOR 
    The Mayor shall receive a salary set by ordinance. No increase in salary shall become effective as to any member in office when such ordinance is adopted or as to newly elected members unless the ordinance is adopted prior to such member's election. Council members in office when such ordinance is adopted may be paid the increased salary only if and when they are elected to succeed themselves. No increase in salary may be passed as emergency legislation. The Mayor while serving as such shall not be entitled to compensation as a member of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.06 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR 
    The Mayor shall serve as the presiding officer at all meetings of the Council, maintain order and decorum, and see that this Charter is observed in all Council meetings. In the Mayor's absence, the Vice Mayor shall preside over all Council meetings. In the absence of the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council members present shall elect a temporary presiding officer from among their own number to serve during the meeting. The Mayor, Vice Mayor or temporary presiding officer may vote on all matters coming before Council. 
    The Mayor shall perform such other duties not inconsistent with the office of Mayor and member of Council as may be imposed by this Charter or by Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor is entitled to a vote as a member of Council. The Mayor shall have no authority to veto legislation. The Mayor may solemnize marriages in accordance with Ohio law. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.07 - CITY MANAGER 
    Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen through Council consideration of technical training, experience in public administration, and administrative and executive qualifications relating to the duties of the office of City Manager as set forth in this Charter and as determined by Council. The City Manager need not be a resident of the City of Powell. No person who serves as a member of Council during any term shall be appointed City Manager until at least one (1) year after the expiration of such term. Council shall designate a qualified person who shall perform the duties of the City Manager during the City Manager's absence or disability of more than 60 days, or during temporary vacancies in the office of City Manager. The City Manager shall designate some qualified officer of the City to serve as Acting City Manager, who shall perform the duties of the City Manager during the City Manager's absence of 60 days or less. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.071 - TERM, EXTENSION AND REMOVAL 
    The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and shall be removable by Council at its pleasure, with or without cause, with at least a majority of all members of Council concurring therein. Council may at any time suspend the City Manager for no longer than sixty (60) days. Any action of Council to remove the City Manager shall be effective at such time as Council shall then determine. The action of Council in removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intent to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such removal in Council. The Council may enter an employment contract with the City Manager; however, no term of that contract may conflict with the terms of this Charter. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.072 - DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER 
    It shall be the duty of the City Manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the City; to see that ordinances and resolutions of the City and laws of the State of Ohio are enforced; to make such recommendations to Council concerning the affairs of the City as may seem desirable; and to keep Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City. The City Manager shall additionally have the authority to supervise the administration of the affairs of the City, including but not limited to: 
a.  Preparation of annual budget estimates for submission by the City Manager to Council. 
b.  Preparation of an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of each department for the preceding year to be published or posted as required by Council by ordinance. 
c.  Serve as the head of any department established by Charter or ordinance, and to fill the vacancy in any department. 
d.  Appoint, promote, discipline, transfer, demote or discharge with or without cause any officer or employee of the City except those required by the Charter to be selected, elected or fixed by the Council in the manner provided for in the Charter and any collective bargaining agreements of the City. 
e.  Supervise the conduct of and exercise control over all departments and divisions thereof, except Council. 
f.  See that the terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City in any franchise or contract to which the City is a party are faithfully kept and performed. 
g.  Declare a public disaster. 
(Amended 5-7-13.) 
3.08 - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
    The administrative activities of the City shall be carried on by a Department of Finance, a Department of Law, a Department of Police and such other departments as may be created by ordinance. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.081 - DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS 
    Each department shall be headed by a Director who may be a full-time or part-time employee of the City, or other person who is appointed by the City Manager. With the exception of the Director of the Department of Law and the Director of the Department of Finance, each department Director shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Director need not be a resident nor an elector of the City. Each Director shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager. The City Manager shall serve as the Director of any department for which the City Manager has not made an appointment and for which the City Manager is otherwise qualified. The City Manager may remove any Director, except the Director of the Department of Law and the Director of the Department of Finance, with or without cause. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.082 - DUTIES OF DIRECTORS 
    The Director of each department shall be empowered to perform the duties incidental to the needs of their departments as may be defined by the City Manager. These duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following duties listed in Sections 3.083 through 3.085. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.083 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
    The Director of Finance shall be the fiscal officer of the City, and shall perform the powers, duties and functions now or hereafter given under the laws of the State of Ohio to city auditors and treasurers, except the statutory duties given to the Clerk of Council by this Charter. The Director shall be a person qualified in government finance and budgeting with training and/or experience to execute the functions of the Department. The Director shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims against the City, and shall issue no warrant unless the claim is found to be in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved, and that it is due and payable, and that appropriation has been made therefore. The Director shall keep and invest the financial accounts of the City, including taxes, assessments, monies due to, and all receipts and disbursements by the City as may be provided by ordinance, subject only to the general laws of the State of Ohio. The Director shall keep the financial records of the City, establish accounting systems, financial records and reports used by all offices, departments, divisions, bureaus, boards and commissions, or other units of the City, and shall assist the City Manager in the preparation and submission of appropriation measures, budget estimates, capital programs and other financial matters. The Director shall be bonded as provided in Section 2.02. Municipal checks or financial expenditures shall be signed by the Director of Finance or his/her designee. The Director of Finance shall be appointed and removed with or without cause by the City Manager and the consent and vote of a majority of all members of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.084 - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE 
    The Chief of Police shall serve as the director of the Department of Police. The Department of Police, consisting of its Chief and other officers, shall have the powers conferred upon police officers in cities of this State and such other powers, not inconsistent with the nature of their offices, as are conferred by statute. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
3.085 - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 
    The Director of Law shall serve the Council and the administrative officers and departments as legal counsel. The Director of Law shall be appointed and may be removed with or without cause by the City Manager with the vote of a majority of all members of Council. No person shall act as Director of Law unless duly admitted to the practice of law in the State of Ohio; the Director of Law shall continue to be registered with the Supreme Court of Ohio and authorized to practice before courts in this state during his or her tenure in office. The Director of Law shall review all ordinances, contracts and other written instruments in which the City is concerned and shall represent the City in all litigation. The Director of Law may utilize assistants or retain special counsel as appropriate and with consent of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE IV - LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY 

4.01 - NUMBER, SELECTION, TERM 
    Except as reserved to the people by this Charter, the legislative powers of the City shall be vested in a Council of seven (7) members, elected for four (4) year overlapping terms. All members of Council shall be elected at large. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.02 - QUALIFICATIONS 
    Any elector who has resided for at least (1) year in the City prior to the date of filing of his or her petition of candidacy, shall be eligible to have his or her name placed on the ballot, if the petition is sufficient as hereinafter provided, and to serve as a member of Council, if elected. Any person convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States while under court supervision for such offense, including probation and parole, or any individual currently under court order as an adjudicated mental incompetent shall be prohibited from having his or her name placed on the ballot or serving as a member of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.03 - INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES 
    No holder of an incompatible national, state, county or local government office shall be eligible to enter upon or hold office as a Council member, and no such members shall hold employment with the City. Council shall determine, at its sole discretion, the incompatibility of offices. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.04 - VACANCIES 
    Any Council member who ceases to be an elector or a resident of the City or who accepts and enters upon the performance of the duties of an incompatible office, shall automatically and immediately vacate his office as a Council member. The Council shall have the sole authority to determine that one of its members is no longer a resident of the City, by vote of a majority of all members of Council, whose determination of this issue shall be final in all respects. The Council shall have power to accept the resignation of any of its members or of any other elected officer of the City by an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.05 - VACANCIES, HOW FILLED 
    Any vacancy in the office of a Council member shall be filled by the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of Council within sixty (60) days of acceptance of resignation or within sixty (60) days after Council has declared a vacancy by the selection of a person meeting the qualifications provided in Section 4.02 of this Charter, and who has submitted to the Clerk of Council a written statement indicating a willingness to fill the unexpired term. If Council fails to fill a vacancy in Council within sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint a person to serve for the time as provided in this section. 
    In all cases, the person so selected shall serve until the first Municipal election occurring not less than one hundred (100) days after selection, at which election a successor shall be chosen by the voters for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any; if not, for a full term. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.06 - SALARY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS 
    The salary of Council members shall be set by ordinance. No increase in salary shall become effective as to any member in office when such ordinance is adopted or as to newly elected members unless the ordinance is adopted prior to such member's election. Council members in office when such ordinance is adopted may be paid the increased salary only if and when they are elected to succeed themselves. No increase in salary may be passed as emergency legislation. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.07 - POWERS OF COUNCIL 
    All legislative powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise reserved to the people by this Charter. The legislative powers of Council include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Creation of additional departments as it may deem necessary and define their duties; 
b.  Adoption and modification of the master plan for the City as an official map of the City; 
c.  Regulation of the use of private real estate in the City by establishing zones, limiting the use of each zone and limiting the height of buildings and the intensity of land use; 
d.  Enactment of a subdivision ordinance, which may provide for platting fees; 
e.  Enactment of a comprehensive building code; 
f.  Adoption of an appropriation ordinance based on the annual budget and delegation of its enforcement to the City Manager; 
g.  Authorization of a levy of taxes and the issuance of bonds, as provided in this Charter and the laws of the State of Ohio; 
h.  Grant public utility franchises by ordinance, by a vote of not less than a majority of all members of Council; no such franchise shall be passed as an emergency ordinance; 
i.  Approve, modify or disapprove the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission made to Council; 
j.  Management and control of the finances and property of the Municipality, except as otherwise provided in this Charter; and 
k.  Exercise all other powers granted to the Council by this Charter and by the Constitution and laws of the state of Ohio. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.08 - MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL 
    The Council shall hold its organizational meeting on or before the tenth (10th) day of January following the preceding general municipal election. At this meeting, the newly elected members shall take the oath of office and the Council shall proceed to elect a Mayor and a Vice-President of Council from among its own members, and appoint a Clerk of Council, and may transact such further business as may come before it. Thereafter, regular Council Meetings shall be held as prescribed in the Council Rules as frequently as Council chooses. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public subject to the right of Council to meet, but not take action, in a non- public executive session held during a regular or special meeting under circumstances permitted by the laws of the State of Ohio. Regular meetings shall be held at the usual place for conducting such meetings unless ten (10) days public notice is given. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three (3) members of Council. Special meetings of Council may be held with twenty- four (24) hours notice to all Council members, media, and the public. The purpose of the meeting must be stated in the notice. Four (4) Council members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Amended 11-2-04) 
4.09 - ELECTION CONTESTS 
    The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, and for such purpose shall have power by subpoena to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of ballots and records. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.10 - RULES, MINUTES 
    The Council shall adopt its own rules, in conformity with the provisions of this Charter. It shall cause to be kept minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.11 - CLERK OF COUNCIL 
    There shall be a Clerk of Council, appointed by the Council from outside its membership, to serve at the pleasure of Council. The Clerk shall give notice of Council meetings, keep the minutes, advertise public hearings, record in a separate book and cause to be published ordinances adopted by the Council, and perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, or by ordinance, or by the rules of the Council. The Clerk may be appointed to serve full-time or part-time and the Council may assign the duties of the Clerk of Council to any employee of the City as an additional duty. The Clerk of Council shall receive a salary as established by the Council. The Clerk of Council may be removed at any time with or without cause, at a regular meeting of Council by a vote of a majority of all members of Council. In the event of a vacancy or temporary absence in the office of Clerk of Council, the Mayor shall designate a qualified person who shall perform the duties of the City Clerk during that period. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
4.12 - FAILURE TO TAKE OATH 
    The Council may declare vacant the office of any elected or appointed member of Council who has failed to take the required official oath within ten (10) days after Council's organizational meeting or a meeting held for the purpose of administering the oath. 
(Enacted 5-7-13) 
4.13 - EXPULSION OF MEMBERS 
    The Council may censure or expel any member of Council for disorderly conduct or violation of its rules, and may also declare any member's seat vacant for absence where such absence has continued for two consecutive calendar months. No expulsion or declaration of vacancy shall take place without the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of all members of Council and until the delinquent member has been notified of the charge(s) against them and has had an opportunity to be heard. 
(Enacted 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE V - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

5.01 - ACTION BY COUNCIL 
    Action of the Council establishing any offense, or providing for the imposition of any penalty, or for the levy of any tax, or for the expenditure of any public funds, or the contracting of any indebtedness, shall be taken by ordinance. Other actions may be taken by resolution. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.02 - INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES 
    Prior to introduction, each ordinance shall be submitted to the Department of Law for approval as to form, then introduced in writing by a member of Council or by the City Manager, and shall contain a title, an opening clause: "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Powell, Ohio," and shall set forth the action to be taken. Each ordinance shall contain one subject, which shall be set forth in its title; however, general appropriation ordinances may contain the various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.03 - CONSIDERATION OF ORDINANCES 
    Each ordinance shall be read on two (2) different days, provided that Council may dispense with this rule by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of all members of Council or by the inclusion of the proposed ordinance on the consent agenda as described in Section 5.04. After its introduction, a proposed ordinance shall be given a first reading by title provided that Council may require a reading in full by the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of Council. The proposed ordinance shall then lie over until the next meeting of Council. At least five (5) days before the second reading of the ordinance, the Clerk of Council shall cause to be posted a notice and summary of the content of the proposed ordinance. The notice shall invite interested persons to attend and express their opinions thereon to Council. At the meeting of Council so advertised, the proposed ordinance shall be given a second reading, which may be by title only, and all persons present who desire to be heard for or against its adoption shall be heard, under such rules as the Council may provide. Written arguments and briefs, for or against, may also be filed at this hearing for consideration by Council. After the second reading and such public hearing thereon, the Council may vote on adoption or rejection of the proposed ordinance. 
    The vote upon each ordinance shall be taken by roll call and recorded by the Clerk of Council. The affirmative vote of a majority of all members of Council shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.04 - CONSENT AGENDA 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council may by resolution designate a specific listing of items which shall be listed as part of a consent agenda on the regular Council meeting agenda. Such items shall be read and a vote shall be taken for approval of all items listed under the consent agenda. Any member of Council may, upon demand, remove any item from the Consent Agenda whereupon it shall be placed on the regular agenda for that Council meeting. 
(Amended 11-2-04) 
5.05 - ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES 
    After two (2) readings, or if the waiting period and hearing are waived by a suspension of the rules, the Council may vote by roll call on whether the ordinance shall be adopted or rejected. A favorable vote of a majority of all members of Council shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance, except as provided otherwise in this Charter. Final passage shall be certified by the signature of the Mayor and the Clerk of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.06 - EMERGENCY ORDINANCES 
    The Council may, by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of all members of Council, pass an emergency ordinance after declaring that such emergency exists and give the reasons therefore. Only ordinances that are necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety or general welfare as determined by Council in its sole discretion may be passed as emergencies. Such ordinances shall take effect immediately upon their passage. Emergency ordinances shall be published within one (1) week after their passage. 
    The following types of ordinances shall not be passed as emergency legislation: 
a.  Tax increases. 
b.  Any appropriations in excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the City's Annual General Fund appropriation except in response to terror-initiated or natural disasters, including but not limited to any event characterized as a terrorist act by the office of Homeland Security, wind storms and earth movement or flooding. 
c.  All ordinances establishing, amending, revising, changing or repealing zoning classifications, districts, uses or regulations. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.07 - RESOLUTIONS 
    Actions by Council not required by this Charter to be by ordinance may be taken by resolution. Such resolution shall be introduced in writing, by a member of Council or the City Manager, and may be adopted by voice vote of a majority of all members of Council. No waiting period, notice or publication shall be required and a resolution shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. The Clerk of Council shall record resolutions in a separate book, which shall be a public record. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.08 - PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
    Ordinances and, if desired, resolutions shall be published by posting copies thereof in not less than two (2) public places in the City for a period of not less than fifteen (15) days after their adoption. The public places for such posting shall be determined by Council. Council may, by ordinance or resolution, require that ordinances and resolutions be published by other means in addition to the postings as required by this section. The Clerk of Council shall make and retain a certificate as to the times and places where such postings are done and other means, if any, by which an ordinance or resolution is published. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.09 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES 
    All ordinances except emergency ordinances shall take effect thirty (30) days after passage by Council (or such other date not less than thirty (30) days after passage as established by Council in an ordinance), and shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk of Council in order to afford an opportunity for filing referendum petitions. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
5.10 - ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE 
    The Council may adopt standard ordinances and codes prepared by public and private agencies on such matters as fire prevention, building construction, electrical wiring, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air conditioning, and other similar topics by reference to the date and source of the code without reproducing the same at length in the ordinance. In all cases in which such an ordinance or code shall be adopted by reference, publication of the code at length, by the City, shall not be required. However, such codes shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of Council for consultation by interested persons. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE VI - RECALL, INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM 

6.01 - REMOVAL BY RECALL 
    No petition for removal of an elected officer of the Municipality shall be filed until such officer has served for at least six (6) months of the term during which such officer is sought to be recalled. Any elected officer of the City may be removed from office by the electors of the City. The procedure to effect such removal shall be: 
(A)  A petition signed by electors equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the total votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election, as defined by the Ohio Revised Code, and demanding the election of a successor to the person sought to be removed, shall be filed with the Delaware County Board of Elections. Such petition shall contain a general statement in not more than two hundred (200) words of the grounds upon which the removal of the person is sought. The form sufficiency, and regularity of any such petition shall be determined as provided by the laws of the State of Ohio. 
(B)  If the petition is sufficient, and if the person whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after the sufficiency of the petition has been determined, Council shall thereupon order and fix a day for holding an election to determine the question of his or her removal, and for the selection of a successor to each officer named in said petition. Such an election shall be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than forty (40) days from the time of the finding of the sufficiency of such a petition. The Delaware County Board of Elections shall publish notice and make all arrangements for holding such an election. 
(C)  The nomination of candidates to succeed each officer sought to be removed shall be made without the intervention of a primary election, by filing with the Delaware County Board of Elections, at least twenty (20) days prior to such a special election, a petition proposing a person for each office, signed by electors equal in number to ten (10) percent of the total votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election. 
(D)  The ballots at such a recall election shall be in such form as the Board of Elections for Delaware County, Ohio shall proscribe and shall, with respect to each person whose removal is sought, submit the questions: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
Immediately following each such question, there will be printed on the ballots, the two propositions in the order set forth: 
"For the recall of (name of person)." 
"Against the recall of (name of person)." 
Under each of such questions shall be placed the names of the candidates to fill the vacancy. The names of the officers whose removal is sought shall not appear on the ballot to succeed such officer. The Board of Elections may modify said ballot for its administrative purposes. 
In any such election, if a majority of the votes cast on the question of removal are affirmative, the person whose removal is sought shall be removed from office upon the announcement of the official canvass of that election, and the candidate receiving the plurality of the votes cast for the candidates for that office shall be declared elected. The successor of any person so removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. 
In any such election where a majority of votes cast on the question of removal are negative, no further recall petition shall be filed against such incumbent for a period of one year. 
(E)  If no one is elected, the removal of any elected officer of the City by recall shall constitute a vacancy of the office previously held by that elected officer and such vacancy shall be filled as provided for in this Charter. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
6.02 - INITIATIVE. 
    Ordinances and other measures providing for the exercise of any powers of government granted by the Ohio Constitution or the laws of the State of Ohio, may be proposed by initiative petition. Such initiative petition must be signed by electors of the City equal to ten (10) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding regular municipal election. The Clerk of Council shall receive the petitions for all initiatives. 
    When a petition is filed with the Clerk of Council signed by the required number of electors proposing an ordinance or other measure, such Clerk shall, after ten (10) days, transmit a certified copy of the text of the proposed ordinance or measure to the Delaware County Board of Elections. The Clerk of Council shall transmit the petition to the Board of Elections together with the certified copy of the proposed ordinance or other measure. The Board shall examine all signatures on the petition to determine the number of electors of the City of Powell who signed the petition. The Board of Elections shall return the petition to the Clerk of Council within ten (10) days after receiving it, together with a statement attesting to the number of such electors who signed the petition. 
    Upon receipt of the statement from the Board of Elections, the Clerk of Council shall submit the petition, the proposed ordinance, and the statement to the Council on the date of its next regular meeting. If the petition and proposed ordinance are determined by the Council to be sufficient and valid, the Council shall, at such regular meeting, read and act upon the same. Council may adopt the ordinance in its original form. Should the Council fail to take action or reject the proposed ordinance, in whole or in part, the Clerk of Council shall provide for the submission of the proposed ordinance in its original form to a vote of the electors of the City at the next succeeding general election. 
    Upon receipt of the proposed ordinance, the Board of Elections shall submit such proposed ordinance or measure for approval or rejection of the electors of the City at the next succeeding general election occurring subsequent to seventy-five (75) days after receipt of the proposed ordinance. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
6.03 - REPEALING ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION 
    Proposed ordinances for repealing any existing ordinance or ordinances, in whole or in part, may be submitted to the Council as herein provided in the preceding sections for initiating ordinances. Initiated ordinances adopted by the electors shall be published as in the case of other ordinances. 
6.04 - REFERENDUM 
    Any ordinance passed by the Council shall be subject to referendum, except emergency ordinances passed pursuant to Section 5.06 of this Charter and as otherwise provided by any applicable section of the Revised Code, including without limitation Section 731.30. The effective date of ordinances is governed by Section 5.09 of this Charter. If a petition signed by electors of the City, not less in number than ten (10) percent of the total votes cast at the last preceding general municipal election, is filed with the Clerk of Council within thirty (30) days after passage of an ordinance subject to referendum, requesting that any such ordinance be repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors of the City, the ordinance shall not take effect until the steps indicated herein have been taken. 
    The Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the filing of a referendum petition, transmit a certified copy of the petition to the Delaware County Board of Elections. The Board shall examine all signatures on the petition to determine the number of electors of the City who signed the petition. The Board shall return the petition to the Clerk of Council within ten (10) days after receiving it, together with a statement attesting to the number of such electors who signed the petition. Upon receipt of the statement from the Board, the Clerk of Council shall submit the petition and the statement to the Council on the date of its next regular meeting. Council shall determine the sufficiency and validity of the petition. If the petition is determined by Council to be sufficient and valid, the Council shall, at such regular meeting, read and act upon the same. Council may repeal the ordinance subject to referendum. Should Council fail to take action or fail to repeal the ordinance subject to referendum, the Clerk of Council shall provide for the submission of such ordinance to a vote of the electors of the City. The Board of Elections shall submit the ordinance to the electors of the City, for their approval or rejection, at the next general election occurring subsequent to seventy-five (75) days after receipt of such ordinance from the Clerk of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
6.05 - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM PETITION PROCEDURES 
    Any initiative or referendum petition may be presented in separate parts, but each of any initiative petition shall contain a full and correct copy of the title and text of the proposed ordinance or other measure. Each part of any referendum petition shall contain the number, a full and correct copy of the title and date of passage of the ordinance or other measure sought to be referred. 
    Each signer of any such petition must be an elector of the City in which the election, upon the ordinance or other measure proposed by such initiative petition or the ordinance or measure referred to by such referendum petition, is to be held, and shall place on such a petition, after his name, the date of signing, his place of residence, including street and number, and the ward and precinct. 
    Each part of such petition shall contain the affidavit of the person soliciting the signatures thereto, which shall state the number of signers of each such part and that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, each of the signatures contained on such part is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, that he believes such persons are electors of the City, and that they signed such petition with knowledge of the contents thereof. 
    Upon receipt of a statement from the Delaware County Board of Elections, pursuant to Chapter 731 of the Revised Code, attesting to the number of electors who signed such petition, Council by resolution shall determine the sufficiency and validity of the petition. In determining the validity of any such petition, all signatures that are found to be irregular shall be rejected, but no petition shall be declared invalid in its entirety when one or more signatures are found to be invalid except when the number of valid signatures is found to be less than the total number required. 
    The petition and signatures upon such petition shall be prima facie presumed to be in all respects sufficient. No ordinance or other measure submitted to the electors of the City and receiving an affirmative majority of votes cast thereon, shall be held ineffective or void on account of the insufficiency of the petitions by which such submission of the ordinance or measure was procured, nor shall rejection, by a majority of the votes cast thereon, of any ordinance or other measure submitted to the electors of such City be held invalid for such insufficiency. 
    Ordinances proposed by initiative petition and referendums receiving an affirmative majority of the votes cast thereon, shall become effective as provided by the laws of the State of Ohio. 
    Where the Charter is silent concerning initiative and referendum petition procedures, the laws of the State of Ohio shall be followed, except the statutory functions and duties of the City Auditor shall be performed by the Clerk of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
6.06 - APPROVAL OR REJECTION 
(A)  Ordinances submitted to the Council by petition and passed by the Council as herein provided, shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. 
(B)  Ordinances rejected or repealed by an electoral vote shall not be re-enacted, in whole or in part, except by an electoral vote. 
(C)  Ordinances approved by an electoral vote shall not be repealed, amended or supplemented, except by an electoral vote. 
(D)  The adoption or rejection of ordinances submitted to an electoral vote shall take effect as provided by the laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Enacted 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE VII - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

7.01 - NOMINATIONS 
    Nominations for all elected offices of the City shall be on a non-partisan basis and be made by petition only. Nominating petitions shall be in the form determined by the Delaware County Board of Elections as provided by the laws of the State of Ohio and signed by the electors of the City. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
7.02 - ELECTIONS 
    Municipal elections for all elected offices shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in the odd numbered years. The Council may, at any time, by resolution, order a special election the purpose of which shall be set forth in the resolution. 
7.03 - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 
    All regular and special elections shall be conducted by the election officials as established under the laws of Ohio. Such elections shall be held in conformity with the provisions of this Charter. Where the Charter is silent, the provisions of the election laws of the State of Ohio shall be followed. 
ARTICLE VIII - FINANCE 

8.01 - FISCAL YEAR 
    The fiscal year of the City for budget, accounting and all other similar purposes shall be the Calendar year. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
8.02 - PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET ESTIMATES 
    In addition to the requirements of the laws of the State of Ohio, on or before the 15th day of November in each year, the City Manager shall prepare and submit to Council a budget estimate of the expenses of conducting the affairs of the City for the following fiscal year. This budget estimate shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal period and, except to the extent required by law or this Charter, shall be in a form acceptable to Council. The budget estimate shall be compiled from detailed information from the various departments and shall include: 
(A)  An itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department during the next fiscal year. 
(B)  Comparisons of such estimate with the corresponding items of expenditure for the last two (2) complete fiscal years, and with the expenditures of the current fiscal year. 
(C)  Reasons for proposed increases or decreases in such items of expenditure compared with the current fiscal year. 
(D)  A separate schedule from each department supportive of that department's budget requests for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(E)  Items of payroll increases either as additional pay to present employees or pay for more employees. 
(F)  A statement from the Finance Director of the total probable income of the City from all revenues for the period covered by the ensuing budget, including probable balances at the end of the fiscal year. 
(G)  The amount of outstanding City debt with a schedule of maturities of bond issues. 
(H)  The amounts required for interest on the City's debt and sinking funds as required by law. 
(I)  Such other information as may be required by the Council. Upon the filing of such estimate the Council shall cause at least two (2) copies to be available at the Municipal office for public inspection. Any citizen of the City may request and receive a copy of the estimate. Copies of the estimate shall also be furnished to the newspapers of general circulation in the City. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
8.03 - APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE 
    Upon receipt of the City Manager's budget estimate as referred to in Section 8.02, the Council shall prepare an appropriation ordinance in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution using the City Manager's estimate as a basis. Such ordinance shall set forth in detail the several items for which the City has to provide and the amount appropriated for each, for the ensuing fiscal year. Provisions shall be made for at least two (2) public hearings on such ordinance. Following the public hearing and at least ten (10) days before its final passage, such ordinance shall be published in the manner provided for publication of ordinances. 
    Upon adoption, the appropriation ordinance shall become effective as of the first day of the fiscal year and shall constitute an appropriation of the items therein without further appropriation. The appropriation ordinance shall be published in the same manner provided for other ordinances. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
8.04 - DATE OF FINAL ADOPTION; FAILURE TO ADOPT 
    The budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be finally adopted not later than December 31 of the current fiscal year. Should the Council fail to adopt said appropriation ordinance or an interim appropriation ordinance by such date, the budget estimate submitted by the City Manager shall be deemed to have been adopted by the Council as the appropriation ordinance. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
8.05 - TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS 
    The Council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered balance of an appropriation as it deems necessary and proper; further, the Council may at any time amend or revise the budget by ordinance provided the budget as amended does not authorize the expenditure of more revenue than will be available. 
ARTICLE IX - CONTACTS, MISCELLANEOUS 

9.01 - CERTAIN CONTRACTS AND EXPENDITURES PROHIBITED 
    No officer, department or agency shall, during any fiscal year, expend or contract to expend any funds or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money on behalf of the City for any purpose in excess of the amounts appropriated for such expenditures or obligations. Any such obligation, oral or written, made in violation hereof shall be void. The officer or employee who knowingly attempts or purports to create such an obligation shall be removed and shall be disqualified from holding further office or employment with the City. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the making of contracts not to be fully performed within the fiscal year, when specifically authorized by the Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
9.02 - FEES 
    All fees received by an official, officer or employee of the City in connection with such person's employment, or under color of such person's office with the City, shall be accounted for in the manner determined by Council and paid within three (3) working days to the General Fund of the City unless otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
9.03 - PURCHASING 
    The Council shall establish a purchasing procedure and assign responsibility therefore to the Director of Finance for all departments of the City. The Director of Finance shall have the duty to contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies, printing materials and equipment required by the City within the appropriations made by the Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
9.04 - COMPETITIVE BIDDING 
    The Council may by ordinance make provision for the making, advertising and awarding of contracts including establishing requirements for receipt of competitive bids, schedules for payments on contracts, security and other provisions for bids and the faithful performance of contracts. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
9.05 - ACCOUNTING STANDARDS 
    The Council shall establish by ordinance accounting concepts, principles, standards and guidelines for the effective financial management of the City, taking into consideration current recommendations and practices established by the Office of the Auditor of the State of Ohio and by such other local, state or national agencies or organizations as will serve the fiscal need of the City. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE X - BORROWING 

10.01 - LIMITATIONS OF DEBT 
    The City shall not incur debt in excess of the limitations imposed by the Constitution and the general laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
10.02 - ISSUANCE OF BONDS OR NOTES 
    The Council may authorize the issuance of bonds or notes only by ordinance passed by the affirmative votes of at least a majority of all members of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
10.03 - PROCEDURE IN BOND OR NOTE ISSUES 
    In all aspects not provided for otherwise in this Charter, the procedure followed in authorizing and issuing bonds and notes and applying the proceeds shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio. 
10.04 - FISCAL AGENT 
    The Council shall designate the fiscal officer or trustee for the City for the purpose of all transactions authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE XI - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

11.01 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
    There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission that shall consist of seven (7) members who are electors of the City. At least five (5) members shall be electors of the City who do not hold elective office and are not a City employee. Members shall be nominated by a member of Council and confirmed by a majority of the members of Council. At no time may more than two (2) members of Council serve as a member of the Commission. 
    Each member will serve a four (4) year term. Terms shall commence on January 1 and be staggered as established by Council by ordinance. A member may serve more than one term. 
    A vacancy during the term of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by a member nominated by a City Council person and confirmed by a majority vote of all members of Council. 
    The Commission shall choose from its members a Chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary; shall make its own rules and regulations; and shall keep minutes of its proceedings. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation unless provided by ordinance. 
    The Commission shall meet at least once a month if there is business before the Commission. Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the Commission shall be necessary for any official action. Unless otherwise provided by Council, this Commission shall have all the power and authority conferred upon such commissions by the laws of the State of Ohio and shall conduct its affairs in a manner provied by such state law. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
11.02 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
    There is hereby created a Board of Zoning Appeals which shall consist of five (5) members nominated by a City Council person and confirmed by a majority vote of all members of Council. No elected official, no City employee, and no member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve on this board. 
    Each member will serve a four (4) year term. Terms shall commence on January 1 and be staggered as established by Council by ordinance. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by a member nominated by a City Council person and confirmed by a majority vote of all members of Council. A member may serve more than one term. 
    Three (3) members shall be required to constitute a quorum and an affirmative vote of a majority of all members shall be needed for any official action. The Board shall choose from its members a Chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
    Unless otherwise provided by Council, this Board shall have all power and authority conferred upon such boards by the laws of the State of Ohio and shall conduct its affairs in the manner provided by such state law. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
11.03 - PERSONNEL BOARD OF REVIEW 
Editor's note- See Article XIV. 
11.04 - MISCELLANEOUS 
    The Council may create such other boards or commissions as it sees fit to establish, and may provide for their appointment and operation by ordinance as long as such boards and commissions are not in conflict with this Charter. 
11.05 - REMOVAL OF BOARD OR COMMISSION MEMBERS 
    The Council may at any time remove any member of any board or commission created by this Charter with or without cause for any reason determined by the Council in its sole discretion. The removal shall not become effective without the concurrence of two-thirds of all members of Council. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE XII - CHARTER PROVISIONS 

12.01 - AMENDMENTS TO THE CHARTER 
    Any section of this Charter may be amended as provided in Article XVIII, Section 9 of the Ohio Constitution, by the submission of the proposed amendment or amendments to the electors of the City. 
    As often as necessary, but no less frequently than every ten (10) years, the Council shall appoint a Charter Review Commission who shall review the Charter and make recommendations to the Council for proposed amendments, if any, to be submitted to the voters of the City. Any such ten (10) year time period shall commence upon the date that the then-appointed Charter Review Commission submits its final report and recommendations to the Council. The appointment of a Charter Review Commission within the prescribed period shall not preclude the Council from submitting recommended Charter amendments to the voters from time to time. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
12.02 - EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY 
    A determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part thereof, except to the extent that such other part is wholly dependent for its operation upon the part declared invalid. 
ARTICLE XIII - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

13.01 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER AND AMENDMENT 
    This Charter was adopted by a majority of the persons voting at the election held on November 7, 1989. The amendments to the Charter proposed by Ordinance 95-23, adopted on May 16, 1995, were approved by the electors voting at the special election held on August 8, 1995, and became effective on January 1, 1996. The amendments to the Charter proposed by Ordinance 96-38A, adopted on August 21, 1996, were approved by the electors voting at the general election held on November 5, 1996, and became effective on January 1, 1997. The amendments to the Charter proposed by Ordinance 2001-05, adopted on February 20, 2001, were approved by the electors voting at the special election held on May 8, 2001, became an amendment to the Charter as of May 8, 2001, and became effective upon the municipality of Powell attaining City status. The amendments to the Charter proposed by Ordinance 2004-46, adopted on August 3, 2004, were approved by the electors voting at the general election held on November 2, 2004, and became effective on January 1, 2005. The amendments to the Charter proposed by Ordinance Nos. 2013-02 through 2013-09,adopted on February 5, 2013, if such amendments are approved by a majority of the persons voting at the election held on May 7, 2013, shall take effect on January 1, 2014. (Amended 5-7-13) 
13.02 - FISCAL SUCCESSION 
    The City of Powell is hereby declared to be the only legal successor of the Village of Powell under the general laws of the state of Ohio and as such the City has title to all property real and personal, owned by the Village including all monies on deposit and all taxes in the process of collection together with all accounts receivable and rights of action. All tax levies voted for a term of years shall remain in effect for the full term provided in such vote. The City also is liable for all outstanding orders, contracts and debts of the Village and for any other obligations for which it may be held liable, as successor to the Village, by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
13.03 - CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, CODES, RULES, AND REGULATIONS 
    All ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Powell, in effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter or any amendment thereto, shall remain in effect until amended or repealed, except as superseded by the provisions of this Charter. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
13.04 - CONTINUATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
    All persons holding office or employment at the time of the adoption of this Charter or any amendment thereto takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties unless provision shall otherwise have been made in the Charter for the performance of such duties by a successor, or the office or employment is abolished. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
13.05 - TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY 
    All public records and property in the custody of officers and employees of the City shall be transferred and delivered promptly to their successors when designated. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
13.06 - CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
    All contracts entered into by the City or for its benefit, prior to the adoption of this Charter or any amendment thereto, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under Ohio law existing at the time this Charter or any amendment thereto takes effect, shall be completed, as nearly as practical, under the provisions of such laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE XIV - CIVIL SERVICE OF THE CITY-MERIT SYSTEM 
PREAMBLE, ESTABLISHMENT OF CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEMS 
    In accordance with the requirements of Article XV, Section 10, of the Ohio Constitution, and in accordance with the City's exercise of local self-government as authorized by Article XVIII, Section 7 of the Ohio Constitution and exercised by Section 1.03 of this Charter, the employment of the employees of the City shall be governed by this Charter, the ordinances of Council and the rules of the Personnel Board of Review. Appointments and promotions of City employees in the classified service as set forth in this Article shall be made on the basis of merit and fitness determined through a competitive selection process, to the extent practicable, except as otherwise established in this Charter, by ordinance of the Council or rules of the Personnel Board of Review. This Charter, the ordinances of Council and rules of the Personnel Board of Review shall be the entire and exclusive procedure, and civil service statutes shall have no effect. 
    Council shall adopt ordinances or resolutions setting forth personnel procedures or standards not otherwise established in this Charter and may assign that function, or parts thereof, to the Personnel Board of Review to establish procedure and standards through its rules. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 

14.01 - CREATION OF PERSONNEL BOARD OF REVIEW 
    Council shall by ordinance provide for and establish a Personnel Board of Review. The Personnel Board of Review shall consist of three (3) electors of the City, not holding other Municipal office or employment, to be appointed by the Council for terms of three (3) years. Terms shall commence on January 1 and be staggered as established by Council by ordinance. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Personnel Board of Review shall be filled through an appointment by Council for the unexpired term. The Board shall designate one (1) of its members as Chair and may appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the Board and who may hold other Municipal office or appointment. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
14.02 - DUTIES OF PERSONNEL BOARD OF REVIEW 
    The Personnel Board of Review shall prescribe, amend and enforce rules consistent with the City Charter and ordinances of Council, (a) for effecting appointments and promotions in the civil service of the City according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained as far as practicable by competitive examinations; (b) for removals, transfers, lay-offs, suspensions, reduction and re-instatement therein; (c) for appeals to the Board; and (d) for standardizing positions and maintaining efficiency therein. The rules, individually or collectively, shall be subject to review by Council, which may reject a rule or rules by a majority of the members of Council when those rules are submitted to Council by the Personnel Board of Review. Rules promulgated by the Personnel Board of Review shall be submitted to Council for review and shall not become effective until thirty (30) days after the date of submission. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
14.03 - CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED POSITIONS 
    Positions in the civil service shall be divided into Classified and Unclassified Services. 
A.  The Unclassified Service shall include: 
1.  All officers and members of Council elected by the people. 
2.  The City Manager. 
3.  The Development Director. 
4.  The Public Service Director. 
5.  The Municipal Engineer. 
6.  The Finance Director. 
7.  The Chief Building Official. 
8.  The Police Chief. 
9.  The Deputy Police Chief. 
10.  The Council/Planning and Zoning Clerk. 
11.  The Director of Law. 
12.  The Parks and Recreation Supervisor. 
13.  All temporary, seasonal, part-time and probationary employees. 
14.  One secretary, assistant or clerk to the City Manager. 
15.  Other Department Heads as designated by Council. 
16.  Other positions for which it is not practicable to examine, as determined by Council. 
B.  The Classified Service shall comprise all positions existing on the effective date of this Charter not specifically included in this Charter in the Unclassified Service. The Classified Service shall include regular full-time members of the Police Department other than the Chief of Police and Deputy Police Chief. 
C.  Unless the position is designated unclassified, employees who have had at least ninety (90) days of continuous full-time service with the City in a position in the Classified Service immediately preceding the effective date of this section shall be retained in the same or similar position in the Classified Service without examination until discharged, reduced, disciplined, promoted or transferred in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board. Any employee in a probationary period may remain subject to their probationary period. 
D.  Following the effective date of this Charter, new positions created from time to time shall be included in the Unclassified Service unless and until Council shall by ordinance designate otherwise. 
(Amended 5-7-13) 
14.04 - PROCEDURE 
    The Personnel Board of Review shall prescribe and enforce rules for the administration of the Classified Service: keep a record of its proceedings and examinations, and in all examinations the Board shall certify to the appointing officer after examination the names of the top applicants to the position, the number to be determined by the Personnel Board of Review and the appointing officer shall appoint one (1) such applicant to the position to be filled from the names provided by the Personnel Board of Review. For testing applicants the Personnel Board of Review shall determine the appropriate means or methods for testing applicants and shall establish rules for determining the means or methods of testing applicants. 
    The Personnel Board of Review may employ hearing officers to conduct hearings on its behalf. The Personnel Board of Review shall prescribe rules for the using of hearing officers. 
(Enacted 5-8-01.) 
14.05 - SALARIES 
    The salaries of the Personnel Board of Review, if any, shall be determined by the Council. 
(Amended 11-2-04) 
14.06 - FUNDS 
    A sufficient sum shall be appropriated by the Council each year to carry out the civil service provisions of this Charter. 
(Enacted 5-8-01; Amended 5-7-13) 
PART ONE - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
TITLE ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 101. - CODIFIED ORDINANCES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances and resolutions, Ch. 123; Rules of construction for offenses and penalties,  501.04; Statute of limitations on prosecutions,  501.06 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; Citation issuance for minor misdemeanors, O.R.C.  2935.26 et seq.; Codification in book form, O.R.C.  731.23; Imprisonment until fine and costs are paid, O.R.C.  1905.30, 2947.14; Statute of limitations on prosecutions, O.R.C.  718.06 

101.01 - DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS. 
(a)  All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the Municipality as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the Codified Ordinances of Powell, Ohio, 1994 for which designation "Codified Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.01) 
(b)  All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "Section" followed by the number, such as "Section 101.01." 
101.02 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless another definition is provided or the context otherwise requires: 
    And may be read or, and or may be read and, if the sense requires it. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.02(F)) 
    Another when used to designate the owner of property which is the subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of property. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.02(B)) 
    Bond includes an undertaking and "undertaking" includes a bond. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.02(D), (E)) 
    Council means the legislative authority of the Municipality. 
    County means Deleware County, Ohio. 
    Keeper or proprietor includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Land or real estate includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  701.01(F)) 
    Municipality or City means the Municipality of Powell, Ohio. 
    Oath includes affirmation and swear includes affirm. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.59(B)) 
    Owner, when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and association. (O.R.C.  1.59(C)) Premises, as applied to property, includes land and buildings. Property means real and personal property. (O.R.C.  1.59(E)) 
    Personal property includes all property except real. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Public authority includes boards of education; the Municipal, County, State or Federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official. 
    Public place includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
    Registered mail includes certified mail and "certified mail" includes registered mail. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.02(G)) 
    Rule includes regulation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.59(F)) 
    Sidewalk means that portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    This state or the state means the State of Ohio. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.59(G)) 
    Street includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the Municipality. 
    Tenant or occupant, as applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
    Whoever includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.02(A)) 
    Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. This provision does not affect any law relating to signatures. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.59(J)) 
101.03 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 
(a)  Common and Technical Usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.42) 
(b)  Singular and Plural; Gender; Tense. As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(2)  Words of one gender include the other genders. 
(3)  Words in the present tense include the future. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.43) 
(c)  Calendar; Computation of Time. 
(1)  Definitions. 
A.  Week means seven consecutive days. 
B.  Year means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.44) 
(2)  If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.45) 
(3)  The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day, then such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. If any legal holiday falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.14) 
(4)  When legislation is to take effect or become operative from and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.15) 
(5)  In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice. 
(d)  Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
(e)  Joint Authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent with State statute or Charter provisions. 
(f)  Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto. 
101.04 - REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL. 
(a)  The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.57) 
(b)  An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is the same as the prior ordinance. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.54) 
(c)  The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except as provided in subsection (d) hereof: 
(1)  Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action taken thereunder; 
(2)  Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder; 
(3)  Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; 
(4)  Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended. 
(d)  If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance as amended. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.58) 
101.05 - CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES. 
(a)  A reference to any portion of the Codified Ordinances applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.55) 
(b)  If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and the last numbers or letters are included. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.56) 
(c)  Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a series of sections or of subsections of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any section or subsection included in such reference. 
    References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by the Codified Ordinances. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.23) 
101.06 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. 
(a)  If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a number, the words govern. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.46) 
(b)  If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision, they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general provision prevail. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.51) 
(c)  (1)  If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails. 
(2)  If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different meetings of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into simultaneous operation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.52) 
101.07 - DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT. 
(a)  In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that: 
(1)  Compliance with the constitutions of the state and of the United States is intended; 
(2)  The entire ordinance is intended to be effective; 
(3)  A just and reasonable result is intended; 
(4)  A result feasible of execution is intended. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.47) 
(b)  An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless expressly made retrospective. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.48) 
(c)  If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention of Council may consider among other matters: 
(1)  The object sought to be attained; 
(2)  The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted; 
(3)  The legislative history; 
(4)  The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws upon the same or similar subjects; 
(5)  The consequences of a particular construction; 
(6)  The administrative construction of the ordinance. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.49) 
101.08 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions are severable. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  1.50) 
101.99 - GENERAL PENALTY. 
    Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the Municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs. 
CHAPTER 103 - OFFICIAL STANDARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 103. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
State Law reference- State standard of time, O.R.C.  1.04; State legal holiday, O.R.C.  1.14, 5.20 et seq.; State flag, O.R.C.  5.01 

TITLE THREE - LEGISLATIVE 
CHAPTER 121 - COUNCIL[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Number; selection; term,  4.01; Qualifications,  4.02; Incompatible offices,  4.03; Vacancies, ;s 4.04, 4.05; Salary,  4.06; Powers,  4.07; Meetings,  4.08; Rules; minutes,  4.10; Clerk,  4.11; Failure to take oath,  4.12; Expulsion of members,  4.13 

121.01 - AGENDA. 
    The conduct of Council meetings shall be controlled by the Rules of Council as enacted and amended by Council from time to time. 
121.02 - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS. 
(a)  The salary for members elected to Council with terms commencing January 1, 2004, shall be set at the rate of $3,000.00 per annum or such greater amount that will be the minimum to qualify for PERS. 
(b)  Members of Council shall receive the following additional compensation and benefits: None. 
(c)  No increase in salary shall become effective as to any member in officer when such ordinance is adopted no as to newly elected members unless the ordinance is adopted prior to such members' election. Council members in office when such ordinance is adopted may be paid the increased salary only if and when they are elected to succeed themselves. 
(d)  Members of Council may waive all or a portion of the salary set forth in subsection (a) herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-40, 11-20-2012) 
TITLE FIVE - ADMINISTRATIVE 
CHAPTER 131 - MAYOR[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Term,  3.02; Qualifications,  3.03; Vacancies,  3.04; Compensation,  3.05; Powers and duties,  3.06 

131.01 - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS. 
(a)  The salary for the individual appointed to or elected to the position of Mayor with the term commencing January 1, 2000, shall be set at the rate of $1,800.00 per annum. 
(b)  The salary for the individual appointed to or elected to the position of Mayor commencing with the term January 1, 2004, shall be set at the rate of $4,500.00 per annum or such greater amount so that it is one and one-half times greater than the rate established for Council member salaries. 
(c)  The Mayor shall receive the following additional compensation and benefits: None. 
(d)  No change in salary of the Mayor shall take effect as to the Mayor then in office during the existing term. While serving as such the Mayor shall not be entitled to compensation as a member of Council. 
(Ord. No. 99-61, 12-21-1999) 
CHAPTER 133 - CITY MANAGER[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment,  3.07; Term, extension, removal,  3.071; Powers and duties,  3.072 

133.01 - PROCEDURES FOR THE SALE, LEASE, OR DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  Disposition Procedure. The following procedures shall be utilized when disposition of Municipally-owned property either by sale or lease: 
(1)  The head of the department who is responsible for the property and the City Manager shall declare the same to be surplus and no longer needed for Municipal purposes. 
(2)  Upon the property being declared surplus, the City Manager, after having obtained authority from Council by Resolution, shall advertise the surplus property for sale or lease in a newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks. The notice shall contain the following information: 
A.  A description of the property to be sold or leased. 
B.  The City's opinion of the value of the property if the same is being offered for sale. 
C.  The minimum and maximum term of years if the property is being offered for lease. 
(3)  The notice shall direct bidders to submit their proposals to the Municipality within a given time period. Such proposals shall include at a minimum the bid price offered for the property, and any other specific information either the City or the bidder believes necessary to evaluate the proposal. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the proposals, the City Manager shall evaluate such bids. The factors to be considered in evaluating the proposals shall include price, proposed use of the property and all other relevant considerations including those criteria and information described in the notice. 
(5)  The City Manager shall report all bids received to Council, together with his recommendations. 
(6)  No property belonging to the Municipality shall be sold or leased except pursuant to the terms of an ordinance adopted by the Council and setting forth the following: 
A.  The identity of the successful bidder. 
B.  A description of the property to be sold or leased. 
C.  A finding that the property is surplus and not needed for municipal purposes. 
(7)  The Municipality shall be under no obligation to accept any of the proposals submitted. The Municipality through its City Manager may accept, reject, or accept with additional conditions deemed appropriate by the City Manager and in the best interest of the Municipality. 
(b)  Sale or Lease if no Proposal is Received. If after following the procedure set forth above, no proposal is received, the Municipality Administrator may sell or lease such property at public or private sale upon the best terms available subject to approval of the same by duly enacted ordinance of Council. 
(c)  Alternative Procedure. Not withstanding the provisions aforementioned, Council may, by ordinance, approve a specific agreement for sale or lease of municipal property that has been declared to be surplus as otherwise set forth herein. 
(d)  Sale of Personal Property of Minimal Value. The City Manager may, in the City Manager's discretion, with or without solicitation for competitive bids sell any item of municipal personal property having a value of $1,000.00 or less by means of public or private sale upon such term as the City Manager deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 95-18, 6-6-1995; Ord. No. 96-06, 1-16-1996) 
133.02 - PROCEDURE FOR THE SOLICITATION OF PROFESSIONAL DESIGN SERVICES. 
(a)  The City Manager shall periodically, at the discretion of the City Manager, advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the community for professional design service individuals or firms seeking a statement of qualifications, experience and any other information deemed relevant by the City Manager to evaluate the design firm on a particular project or generally. 
(b)  From time to time as determined by the City Manager, eligible design firms shall be presented to Council on an as-needed basis for any project. 
(c)  For every proposed professional design services contract, the statement of qualifications for professional design firms shall be reviewed and evaluated. A Committee convened by the City Manager or his/her designee shall review and evaluate the statement of qualifications using a pre-established project criteria. 
(1)  The Committee shall issue a list of no fewer than three firms rated qualified to perform the required services. If fewer than three qualified firms are identified, written notification shall be sent to the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(2)  A scope of work clarification meeting may be conducted with the firms listed. The meeting(s) shall be designed to further explore the scope and nature of the services required, the various technical approaches the firms may take toward the project, unique project requirements, and the project schedule. 
(3)  The firms will be asked to supplement their statement of qualifications with a technical proposal in accordance with the final scope of services and project requirements. The City Manager or his/her designee shall convene an evaluation committee which shall review the technical proposals and interview the firms. 
(4)  The Committee shall evaluate, select and rank all the firms which are interviewed based on their qualifications and technical proposals. 
(5)  City staff shall open negotiations with the firm ranked first and determined to be most qualified to perform the required services. Contract negotiations shall be directed toward: ensuring that the professional design firm and the City have a mutual understanding of the essential requirements involved in providing the required services; determining that the firm will make available the necessary personnel, equipment and facilities to perform the services within the required time; agreeing upon compensation which is fair and reasonable. 
(6)  Upon failure to negotiate a contract with the firm ranked most qualified, the firm shall be informed in writing of the termination of negotiations. Negotiations shall proceed with the firm ranked next most qualified. If negotiations again fail, the same procedure shall be followed with each next most qualified firm in order of ranking until a contract is negotiated. 
(7)  After a contract has been negotiated with the firm deemed most qualified, an ordinance authorizing the contract will be brought before Council. If Council approves the contract as negotiated, it shall be adopted by ordinance of Council. If Council fails to approve the contract as negotiated, it shall instruct staff whether to continue to negotiate with the firm ranked first or whether to open negotiations with the next firm. 
(d)  The procedure set forth herein shall not be required in case of: 
(1)  Any instance or project deemed to be an emergency by the City Manager, or 
(2)  Any instance or project with estimated professional design fees less than $50,000.00. 
(3)  Prior approval and finding by Council that a firm is uniquely qualified to provide services for a specific project. 
(Ord. No. 2004-54, 8-17-2004) 
133.03 - PROCEDURE FOR RECEIVING PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACTED LAW DIRECTOR SERVICES. 
    Every three years the City Manager shall advertise for Law Director services seeking statement of qualifications, experience and any other information deemed relevant by the City Manager to evaluate law firms. 
(Ord. No. 2006-32, 6-6-2006) 
CHAPTER 135 - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 135. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Duties,  3.082 

CHAPTER 137 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 137. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Power and duties,  3.083; Submission of budget estimates,  8.02; Contracts,  9.01; Purchasing,  9.03; Bidding,  9.04; Accounting standards,  9.05; Borrowing  10.01 et seq. 

CHAPTER 139 - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 139. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Duties,  3.082 
State Law reference- Peace officer training certificate required for permanent employment, O.R.C.  109.77; Police protection contracts, O.R.C.  505.441, 737.04; Recovered property and disposition, O.R.C.  737.29 et seq.; Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund, O.R.C. Ch. 742 

CHAPTER 140 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Powers,  3.084 
State Law reference- Police officer training certificate required, O.R.C.  109.77; Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund, O.R.C. Ch. 742; Auxiliary police unit, O.R.C.  737.161 

140.01 - ESTABLISHED. 
    There is hereby created an Administrative Department of the Municipality to be known as the Department of Police to be supervised and controlled by a Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 97-16, 4-1-1997) 
140.02 - CHIEF OF POLICE. 
    A Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager to serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Chief of Police need not be a resident of the Municipality. Prior to appointment, the Chief must pass a physical examination administered by a licensed physician showing that he meets the physical requirements necessary to perform the duties of the Chief of Police as they are established by the City Manager. The City Manager, prior to making such appointment shall file with the Police and Fireman Disability and Pension Fund a copy of the report of the findings of the licensed physician. The professional fee for such physical examination shall be paid by the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 97-16, 4-1-1997) 
140.03 - COMPOSITION. 
    The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint such police officers as are necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Municipality. Also such employees and non-sworn department personnel so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the Chief of Police and City Manager. No officer appointment shall occur unless the appointee has passed a physical examination within 60 days of the appointment showing that the appointee meets the physical requirements necessary to perform the duties of the position of police officer for the Municipality. Prior to time of appointment the City Manager shall file with the Police and Fireman Disability and Pension Fund a copy of the report to the licensed physician. The professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid by the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 97-16, 4-1-1997) 
140.04 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
(a)  The Department of Police consisting of its Chief and other officers shall have the powers conferred upon police officers in villages and cities of this state and such other powers not inconsistent with the nature of their offices as are conferred by ordinance. Either the Chief or officers may serve or participate as part of an organized crime task force pursuant to the provisions of O.R.C.  177.02 or a member of the investigative staff of such a task force in an investigation of organized criminal activity in any county or counties in this State pursuant to the provisions of O.R.C.  177.01-177.03. 
(b)  In addition to such other duties assigned to the Chief of Police herein, the Chief of Police shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, and to that end may call upon any of the citizens of the Municipality to aid him. He shall arrest all disorderly persons in the Municipality and pursue and arrest any persons fleeing from justice in any part of the state. He shall arrest any person in the act of committing an offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the Municipality and further bring such persons before a Judge, Magistrate or other competent authority for examination or trial. He shall receive and execute any proper authority for the arrest and detention of criminals fleeing or escaping from other places. The Chief of Police and police officers appointed prior to this enactment shall continue in office. 
(Ord. No. 97-16, 4-1-1997) 
CHAPTER 141 - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC GROUNDS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 141. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Duties,  3.082 

CHAPTER 143 - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 143. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Duties; qualifications; renewal,  3.085 
State Law reference- Conflict of interest, O.R.C.  120.39 

CHAPTER 145 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[12] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Established; members; term; meetings,  11.01; Removal of members,  11.05 
Cross reference- Board of Zoning Appeals, Ch. 147 

145.01 - COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS. 
(a)  The compensation for members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be set at the rate of $50.00 per month. 
(b)  Members of the Commission may waive all or a portion of the compensation set forth in subsection (a) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-40, 11-20-2012) 
CHAPTER 147 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[13] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Established; members; duties,  11.02; Removal of members,  11.05 

147.01 - DUTIES. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals in addition to those duties set forth in Charter Section 11.02 shall: 
(a)  Consider and hear appeals pursuant to any Building Codes adopted by the Municipality of Powell. 
(b)  Consider and decide Certificates of Necessity pursuant to the Property Maintenance Code for the Municipality, Codified Ordinances Section 1323.13. 
(c)  Consider and decide appeals pursuant to the Property Maintenance Code for the Municipality under the provisions of Codified Ordinances Section 1323.09(c) and (d). 
(Ord. No. 99-29, 6-15-1999) 
CHAPTER 149 - CIVIL SERVICE[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 149. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Establishment of systems,  14.01; Classified and unclassified positions,  14.03; Procedure,  14.04; Salaries,  14.05; Funds,  14.06 
Cross reference- Personnel Board of Review,  155.04 

CHAPTER 151 - RECORDS COMMISSION[15] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Photostat or microfilm recording, O.R.C.  9.01 

151.01 - ESTABLISHED. 
    There is hereby created by the Municipality of Powell a Municipal Records Commission consisting of the City Manager, the Director of Finance, the Director of Law and a citizen to be appointed by the City Manager who shall serve as Chairman of the Commission. The Commission shall appoint a secretary who may or may not be a member of the Commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, 2-20-1996) 
151.02 - MEETINGS. 
    The Records Commission shall meet at least once every six months and upon call of the Chairman. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, 2-20-1996) 
151.03 - FUNCTION OF THE COMMISSION. 
(a)  The Commission shall provide rules for the retention and disposal of records of the Municipal Corporation and review disposal of records of the Municipal Corporation and review applications for one time records disposal and schedules of records retention and disposition submitted by Municipal officers. 
(b)  Disposal of public records approved by the Records Commission shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of O.R.C.  149.39 and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, 2-20-1996) 
CHAPTER 153 - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[16] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish,  11.04 
Cross reference- Park rules and regulations, Ch. 955 
State Law reference- Bonds for recreational facilities, O.R.C.  133.032, 755.17; Power to construct recreational centers, O.R.C.  717.01 

153.01 - ESTABLISHED. 
    The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be composed of seven members who shall be electors resident in the City. All members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire membership of Council. 
(a)  Term. All members of the Board shall serve in such capacity for a period of three years or until resignation or removal. Removal may occur at any time, with or without cause, by majority vote of Council. Existing members shall serve to the end of their term. Board members shall be staggered so that one-third of the Board shall terminate annually. 
(b)  Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy on the Advisory Board, Council shall by majority vote make an appointment to fill the unexpired term. 
(c)  Compensation. All members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 98-06, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 2004-32, 4-20-2004) 
153.02 - ORGANIZATION. 
    Annually at its first meeting in January, the Board shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and implement rules of procedure. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall meet on a regularly adopted schedule and all meetings shall be open to the public. The minutes of the meeting shall be maintained by the Secretary who shall forward them to the City Manager. The rules of procedure to be adopted by the Advisory Board are subject to review by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, 1-16-1996) 
153.03 - DUTIES. 
    The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following duties: 
(a)  Advisory Capacity Only. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall act solely in an advisory capacity to the City Manager and Council, and all reports and proposals shall be made to the City Manager and Council. 
(b)  Staff Assistance. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board may call upon the City Manager, the Director of Public Grounds who shall serve as advisor to the Board, and any other department of the City as the Board may deem appropriate for assistance. 
(c)  Specific Duties. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall perform the following duties and such other duties as may from time to time be requested by the City Manager or Council: 
(1)  Develop a Master Plan for the development of Parks and Recreation facilities throughout the City including but not limited to capital budgetary requirements and recommended priorities. The Master Plan shall be reviewed at least every two years, and when deemed appropriate, a recommendation for revision shall be submitted to Council. 
(2)  Study and report to the City Manager and Council the needs of the City regarding parks and recreational facilities including personnel needs, maintenance and operating budgetary needs. 
(3)  Advise the City Manager and Council regarding rules, regulations and policies for operation and use of parks and recreational facilities in the City. 
(4)  Solicit from residents of the City the desires of the residents as to the type and quality of parks and recreational facilities which should be provided to residents. 
(5)  Coordinate with other governmental entities and recreational agencies. 
(d)  Budgetary Controls. The Director of Public Grounds and Finance Director shall approve all expenditures by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board subject to expenditure procedures and budgets adopted by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, 1-16-1996) 
153.04 - ARBOR ADVISORY SUBCOMMITTEE. 
    There is hereby created a subcommittee of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board to be known as the Arbor Advisory Subcommittee. The Subcommittee shall be responsible to select and promote the planting of new trees in the City pursuant to the program described herein and to make final determinations regarding the tree species to be planted in the public rights of way of the Municipality. The Subcommittee shall further accomplish such additional duties as directed by the Parks and Recreation Committee and Council. It is the intent of the Council that there be significant public input and comment permitted prior to decisions by the Committee. The Committee shall deal with planting along the right of way of any dedicated public street, railway or any other dedicated public right of way. 
(a)  Membership. The Subcommittee shall consist of three members recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and approved by Council. Membership shall be for a period of two years. 
(b)  Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy in the Subcommittee, the appointing authority shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term with the approval of Council. 
(c)  Compensation. There shall be no compensation paid to a member for serving on the Arbor Advisory Subcommittee of the Parks and Recreation Board. 
(d)  Funding. There is hereby created a City Tree Sharing Program to be funded on an annual basis by Council. It is intended that from such sums appropriated, applicants may seek payment from the Municipality of one-half of the cost of new tree plantings or replacement tree plantings provided the applicant pays the other half. 
(e)  Location. Trees purchased under the City Tree Sharing Program shall be planted within five feet of a dedicated public street, railroad right of way, or other dedicated right-of-way. All trees shall further be planted at least ten feet from fire hydrants and utility lines and 35 feet from the corner curb of street intersections. The Director of Public Service shall approve the location of all plantings. Any variation from the foregoing guidelines must be approved by the Subcommittee. 
(f)  Application and Approval Process. Applications to participate in the City Tree Sharing Program may be made by owners or occupants of real estate abutting public rights of way or by neighborhood associations. Applications shall be made on a form and in a format as developed and approved by the Subcommittee. The Committee shall approve or deny such application based upon a criteria developed by such Committee. Such criteria shall be designed to encourage equitable distribution of trees pursuant to the program throughout the City. 
(g)  Records. The Director of Finance shall develop such records by neighborhood or street or lot owner to assist the Subcommittee in attempting to equally distribute the trees throughout the community. 
(h)  Care and Maintenance. Any applicant, after approval, shall be responsible for the watering of such tree or trees once per week for the first two summers following planting. The Municipality will maintain responsibility for removal of dead trees, replanting, pruning and street maintenance with respect to trees purchased under the program. 
(Ord. No. 98-16, 7-7-1998) 
CHAPTER 155 - EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[17] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Charter reference- Oath,  2.01; Bonds,  2.02; Conflict of interest,  2.03 
State Constitution reference- Worker's compensation, Ohio Const. Art. II,  35 
State Law reference- Worker's compensation, O.R.C. Ch. 4123; Deductions for dues and savings, O.R.C.  9.41, 9.43; Public Employees Retirement System, O.R.C. Ch. 145; Vacation credit, O.R.C.  9.44; Ethics, O.R.C. Ch. 102 

155.01 - PERSONNEL MANUAL. 
    The Municipality has adopted a Personnel Manual for the purpose of establishing policies and procedures for employees. Copies are on file at the Municipal Building. 
155.02 - MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT. 
    Municipal personnel entitled to mileage reimbursement shall be reimbursed at no greater a rate than the rate permitted by the Internal Revenue Service on Federal tax returns, as said rate now exists and may from time to time be amended, or such lower rate as the City Manager shall establish. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, 4-2-1996) 
155.03 - BONDS. 
(a)  The following named officers and employees of the Municipality shall furnish a corporate surety bond by a company authorized to do business in the State to protect the Municipality against loss due to their acts. Any successor in office or employment shall furnish a bond in like amount before commencing duties as such officer or employee: 
(1)  City Manager ..... $100,000.00 
(2)  Director of Finance ..... 100,000.00 
(3)  Blanket bond for all other employees ..... 25,000.00 
(b)  The premiums for such bonds shall be paid from the funds of the Municipality. 
(Ord. 01-06, 2-6-2001) 
155.04 - PERSONNEL BOARD OF REVIEW. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Personnel Board of Review consisting of three electors of the Municipality, not holding other Municipal office or employment, to be appointed by the Council for terms of four years each excepting that of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of two years, one for three years, and one for four years. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Personnel Board of Review shall be filled through an appointment by the Council for the un-expired term. The Board shall designate one of its members as chair and may appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the Board and who may hold other Municipal office or appointment, as set forth in Charter Section 11.03 as amended. 
(b)  The Personnel Board of Review shall prescribe, amend, and enforce rules consistent with the City Charter and ordinances of Council: 
(1)  For effecting appointments and promotions in the Civil Service of the Municipality according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained as far as practicable by competitive examinations; 
(2)  For removals, transfers, layoffs, suspensions, reduction and reinstatement therein; 
(3)  For appeals to the Board; and 
(4)  For standardizing positions and maintaining efficiency therein. 
    The rules, individually or collectively, shall be subject to review by Council, which may reject a rules or rules by a majority of the members of Council when those rules are submitted to the Council by the Personnel Board of Review. Rules promulgated by the Personnel Board of Review shall be submitted to Council for review and shall not become effective until 30 days after the date of submission, as set forth in Charter Section 11.03 as amended. 
(Res. 01-28, 5-15-2001) 
TITLE SEVEN - JUDICIAL 
CHAPTER 171 - MUNICIPAL COURT[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- The Delaware Municipal Court was established under provisions of Ohio Revised Code Section 1901.01 and has the powers and duties set forth in Ohio Revised Code Chapter 1901. The territorial jurisdiction of the Court includes the Municipality of Powell. 
State Law reference- Municipal Court, O.R.C. Ch. 1901; Power to establish schedule of fees and costs, O.R.C.  1901.26; Bond for Court Clerk required, O.R.C.  1901.31(d) 

TITLE NINE - TAXATION 
CHAPTER 181 - INCOME TAX[19] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter codifies the income tax through December 31, 2015. See Chapter 182 for the income tax effective January 1, 2016. 
State Law reference- Payroll deductions, O.R.C. 9.42; Municipal income taxes, O.R.C. Ch. 718; State income tax, O.R.C. Ch. 5747 

181.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except as and if the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter genders. 
    Adjusted Federal Taxable Income means a "C" corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, but including subsequent adjustments from required additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute "Adjusted Federal Taxable Income" as if the pass-through entity was a "C" corporation. This definition does not apply to any taxpayer required to file a return under Ohio Revised Code section 5745.03 or to the net profits from a sole proprietorship. 
    Association means a partnership, limited partnership, limited liability Company, Chapter S Corporations as defined in the federal tax code, 26 U.S.C. 1361, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned by one or more persons. 
    Board of Appeals means the Board created by and constituted as provided in Section 181.19. 
    Business means an enterprise, profession or other activity undertaking of an individual, partnership, fiduciary, trust, association, corporation or any other entity conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit. 
    City means the City of Powell, Ohio. 
    Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States, State of Ohio, or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency but not including Chapter S Corporations as defined in the federal tax code, 26 U.S.C. 1361. 
    Domicile means the permanent legal residence of a taxpayer. A taxpayer may have more than one residence but not more than one domicile. 
    Employee means one who works for wages, salary, commissions, or other type of compensation in the service of and under the control of an employer. 
    Employer means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized for profit, having a place of business or doing business within the City, and who or which employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation or other income basis. 
    Finance director means the individual charged with the responsibility of managing the fiscal affairs of the City, including the administration of the municipal income tax. The Finance Director shall have the power to appoint a delegate to assist in the administration of this chapter, and such delegate shall be responsible to the Finance Director and shall have the power to do all things that the finance director may do under this chapter to the extent so authorized by the Finance Director. 
    Fiscal year means an accounting period of 12 months or less ending on any day other than December 31. 
    Generic form means an electronic or paper form designed for reporting estimated municipal income taxes, and/or annual municipal income tax liability, and/or separate requests for refunds that contain all the information required on the City's regular tax return and estimated payment forms, and are in a similar format that will allow processing of the generic forms without altering the City's procedures for processing forms. 
    Gross receipts means the total revenue of a business derived from sales, work done, or service rendered, before any deductions, exceptions, or credits are claimed. 
    Income means all monies derived from any source whatsoever, including but not limited to: 
(1)  All salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and other income from whatever source received by resident individuals, including but not limited to: 
A.  Alimony that is received; and 
B.  Lottery, gambling and sports winnings, and games of chance. No deductions shall be allowed against income from lottery, gambling and sports winnings, and games of chance unless, for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer is considered a professional gambler, and then deductions as specified for federal tax purposes shall be allowed for gambling and sports winnings. 
(2)  All salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and other income from whatever source received by nonresidents for work done or services performed or rendered or activities conducted in the City. 
    Intangible income means that income specified in O.R.C.  718.01(A)(5), including any amendments or successor provisions thereto. 
    Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Service Code, Title 26 of the U.S. Code (26 USC), as amended from time to time. 
    Net profits means, for taxable years 2004 and later, "adjusted federal taxable income." "Net profits" means, for taxable years prior to 2004, the net gain from the operation of a business, profession, enterprise or other activity whether or not such business, profession, enterprise or other activity is conducted for profit or is ordinarily conducted for profit, after provision for all ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system (i.e., cash or accrual) used by the taxpayers for federal income tax purposes without deduction of taxes imposed by this chapter, federal, state or other taxes based on income; and in the case of an association, without deduction of salaries paid to partners and other owners; and otherwise adjusted to the requirements of this chapter. 
    Nonresident individual means an individual who is not domiciled in the City. 
    Nonresident unincorporated business entity means an unincorporated business entity not having a place of business within the City. 
    Other activity means any undertaking, not otherwise specifically defined herein, which is normally entered into for profit, including, but not limited to, rental of real and personal property and a business conducted by a trust or guardianship estate. 
    Pass-through entity means a partnership, S Corporation, Limited Liability Company, or any other class of entity the income or profits from which are given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code. Unless otherwise specified, for purposes of this chapter the tax treatment for pass-through entities is the same as "Association." 
    Person means every individual, partnership, fiduciary, trust, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the parties or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Place of business means any bona fide office, factory, warehouse or other place, other than a mere statutory office, which is occupied and used by the taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through any one or more his regular employees regularly in attendance. 
    Qualifying wage means for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, but including subsequent adjustments from required additions and deductions. "Qualifying wage" represents employees' income from which municipal tax shall be deducted by the employer, and any wages not considered a part of "qualifying wage" shall not be taxed by a Municipality. 
    Resident individual means any individual who is domiciled in the City. 
    Resident unincorporated business entity means an unincorporated business entity having a place of business within the City. 
    Taxable income means income minus the deductions and credits allowed by this chapter. 
    Taxable year means the calendar year or the fiscal year upon the basis of which the net profits are to be computed under this chapter and, in the case of a return for a fractional part of the year, the period for which such return is required to be made. Unless otherwise approved by the Finance Director, the taxable year of a wage earner shall be a calendar year. 
    Taxing municipality means any municipal corporation, other than the City, that levies a municipal income tax on income earned by individuals and on the net profits earned from the operation of a business. 
    Taxpayer means a person, whether an individual, partnership, association, corporation or other entity, required hereunder to file a return and/or pay a tax. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.02 - IMPOSITION OF TAX. 
(a)  To provide for the purposes of general operations, maintenance, new equipment, and capital improvements of the City a tax at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per annum is hereby levied upon the following: 
(1)  On all income earned and/or received by a resident individual. 
(2)  On all income, earned and/or received by a nonresident individuals for work done or services performed or rendered in the City. Separation pay, termination pay, reduction-in-force pay, and other compensation paid as a result of an employee leaving the service of an employer shall be allocable only to the City. 
A.  The City shall not, however, tax the income of a nonresident individual who will be deemed to be an occasional entrant if all of the following apply: 
1.  The nonresident individual has performed personal services in the City on 12 or fewer days during the calendar year. A day is a full day or any fractional part of a day. 
2.  The principal place of business of the nonresident individual's employer is located outside the City and the individual pays tax on compensation described in Section 181.02(a)(2) to a taxing municipality, if any, in which the employer's principal place of business is located, and no portion of that tax is refunded to the nonresident individual. 
3.  The nonresident individual is not a professional entertainer or professional athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports event, or an employee of such a promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the City. 
B.  If a nonresident individual is no longer deemed to be an occasional entrant, the employer of said individual shall begin withholding. The City income tax from compensation described in Section 181.02(a)(2), including, but not limited to, such compensation that was not taxed when the nonresident individual was deemed to be an occasional entrant, and shall remit the withheld income tax to the City in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Net Profits. 
A.  On the net profits earned of all resident associations, unincorporated businesses, professions, or other entities or other activities derived from sales made, work done, services performed, or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the City. 
B.  On the net profits earned of all nonresident associations, unincorporated businesses, professions, or other entities or other activities derived from sales made, work done, services performed, or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the City. 
C.  1.  On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned and/or received of a resident partner or owner of a resident unincorporated business entity and/or association not attributable to the City and not levied against such unincorporated business entity and/or association. 
2.  On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned and/or received of a resident partner or owner of a nonresident unincorporated business entity and/or association not attributable to the City and not levied against such unincorporated business entity and/or association. 
3.  The tax imposed on resident associations and/or unincorporated business entities, and non-resident associations and/or unincorporated business entities doing business in the City, and owned by one or more persons is upon the shareholders, owners, and partners, but the associations and entities shall collect and remit the tax on behalf of its shareholders, owners, and partners. 
D.  On the net profits of all corporations, estates and trusts that are not pass-through entities derived from sales made, work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the City, whether or not such corporations, estates and trusts have their principal or any place of business located in the City. 
E.  On the net profits of all resident sole proprietorships, and on the net profits of all non-resident sole proprietorships for work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the City. 
F.  Effective for tax years 2004 and later, the distributive share of income paid to an S Corporation shareholder shall be taxable in the following manner: 
1.  If no portion of the net profits of the S Corporation are allocated or apportioned to the State of Ohio, the distributive share is taxable only to the extent that it represents wages or net earnings from self-employment. 
2.  If any portion of the net profits of the S Corporation are allocated or apportioned to the State of Ohio, the full amount of the distributive share is taxable. 
(b)  Exceptions. The tax provided for herein shall not be levied upon: 
(1)  Military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and of members of their reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. 
(2)  The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary or educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived from tax exempt real estate, tax exempt tangible or intangible property or tax exempt activities. 
(3)  Poor relief, unemployment insurance benefits, pensions paid as a result of retirement, and disability benefits received from local, state or federal governments or charitable, religious or educational organizations. 
(4)  Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured, disability benefits, annuities or gratuities not in the nature of compensation for services rendered from whatever source derived. 
(5)  Receipts by bona fide charitable, religious and educational organizations and associations, when those receipts are from seasonal or casual entertainment, amusements, sports events and health and welfare activities when any such are conducted by bona fide charitable, religious or educational organizations and associations. 
(6)  Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection (b)(6) hereof was repealed by Ordinance 2015-48. 
(7)  Parsonage allowance, to the extent of the rental allowance or rental value of a house provided as a part of an ordained minister's compensation. The minister must be duly ordained, commissioned, or licensed by a religious body constituting a church or church denomination and be permitted to perform all the sacraments of the religious body, including that of marriage. 
(8)  Compensation paid to a precinct election official, to the extent that such compensation does not exceed $1,000.00 annually. 
(9)  Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property by way of insurance or otherwise, but this exclusion does not apply to compensation paid for lost salaries or wages, or to compensate for punitive damages. 
(10)  Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness, interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed by the State of Ohio from which the City is specifically prohibited from taxing and income of decedent's estate during the period of administration (except such income from the operation of a business). 
(11)  Other income, salaries, wages, commissions and compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the United Sates Constitution or any act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their political subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate commerce. 
(12)  Other income, salaries, wages, commissions and compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Ohio or any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the power of the City to impose net income taxes. 
(13)  Intangible income as defined in O.R.C.  718.01(A)(5). 
(14)  Unreimbursed employee business expenses deductible on federal form 2106. The deductions shall be subject to federal guidelines, and to review and audit by the City's Income Tax Office. Expenses must be allocated proportionate to the related income. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.03 - ALLOCATION OF NET PROFITS. 
(a)  Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the City shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the City for the purpose of the tax in the same portion as the average ratio of: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, whenever situated. As used in this subsection, real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight. 
(2)  Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed in the City, to wages, salaries and other compensation paid or accrued during the same period to persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their services are performed. For tax year 2004 and subsequent tax years, wages, salaries, and other compensation shall be included to the extent that they represent qualifying wages. 
(3)  Gross receipt of the business or profession from sales made and services performed during the taxable period in the City to gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales and services, wherever made or performed. 
(4)  In the event that the foregoing allocation formula in Section 181.03(a)(1-3) does not produce an equitable result, another basis (including the books and records method) may, under uniform regulations, be substituted by the Finance Director or his delegate so as to produce such result. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, "sales made in the City" means: 
(1)  All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within the City regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of goods within the City. 
(2)  All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within the City regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point outside of the City if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation of promotion of sales with the City and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(3)  All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from a place within the City to purchasers outside the City regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made. 
(c)  Consolidated Returns. 
(1)  Any affiliated group which files a consolidated return for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code may file a consolidated return with the City. However, once the affiliated group has elected to file a consolidated return or a separate return with the City, the affiliated group may not change Its method of filing in any subsequent tax year without written approval from the Finance Director. 
(2)  If a corporation carries on transactions with its stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or some other method, or if any person operates a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or other activity within the City constituting a portion of its total business, the Finance Director may require such additional information as he/she may deem necessary to ascertain whether or not net profits are properly allocated to the City. If the Finance Director finds net profits are not properly allocated to the City by reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directories or transactions with such division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or other activity or by some other method, he or she shall make such allocation as he or she deems appropriate to produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.04 - LEVY OF TAX AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD. 
(a)  The income tax of three-quarters of one percent per annum shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the income, earned, accrued and/or received on and after January 1, 1990, and with respect to the net profits of business, professions or other activities earned, accrued and/or received on and after January 1, 1990. Provided, however, that where the fiscal year of the business, profession or other activity differs from the calendar year the tax shall be applied to that part of the net profits for the fiscal year as shall be earned on and after January 1, 1990, to the close of the taxpayer's fiscal year. Thereafter, the taxpayer shall report on its fiscal year basis. 
(b)  Where the fiscal year of business, profession or other activity is other than a calendar year, in computing initial tax the net profits of such taxpayer shall be determined by dividing the annual net profits by 12 and multiplying the quotient by the number of months within the period commencing January 1, 1990, and ending at the conclusion of such fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.05 - RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX. 
(a)  Each taxpayer, including each resident individual 18 years of age or older, who engages in business or other activity, or whose income, are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall, whether or not a tax be due thereon, make and file a return on or before April 15 of each year. Provided, however, that when the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different from the calendar year, the return shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the close of that fiscal year or other period. 
(b)  If a taxpayer's entire income is exempt from taxation by the City, the taxpayer, in lieu of filing a return, shall file a one-time information return stating the reasons the taxpayer is exempt. If at any time thereafter the taxpayer once again earns and/or receives income taxable to the City, the taxpayer must reactivate his City tax account by informing the Finance Director within 30 days after earning or receiving such income. 
(c)  The taxpayer shall file the return with the Finance Director on a form furnished by or obtainable from the Finance Director or on an acceptable generic form as defined in this chapter, setting forth: 
(1)  The aggregate amount of income, earned. 
(2)  Net profits earned and/or gross receipts from such business, profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such gross income earned during the preceding year and subject to the tax. 
(3)  The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and profits. 
(4)  Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other information as the Finance Director may require, including but not limited to copies of all W-2 forms, 1099 Miscellaneous Income Forms, page one of form 1040, Page One and Two of Form 1120, 1120S (including (K-1), 2106, 1065, Schedule C (including cost of goods manufactured and/or sold), Schedule E, Schedule F and any other Federal Schedules, if applicable. 
(d)  Payment of Tax. 
(1)  Each taxpayer whose income are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter may offset losses from any business or professional activity when conducted in this City or from losses incurred in any municipality that does not levy an income tax on net profits there from. Offsets shall not be allowed against wage or other non-business income. 
(2)  A husband and wife, in any taxable year, may elect to file separate or joint returns. If joint returns are filed, a husband or wife may offset losses from any business or professional activity when conducted in this City or from losses incurred in any municipality that does not levy an income tax on net profits there from. Offsets shall not be allowed against wage or other non-business income. 
(3)  If a net operating loss has been sustained in any taxable year such losses may not be carried forward or backward to any other taxable year. 
(4)  The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of the filing thereof, pay to the Finance Director the amount of taxes shown as due thereon; provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due shall have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of Section 181.07 or where any portion of such tax has been paid by the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of Section 181.08, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, credit for the amount so paid in accordance with Section 181.13, shall be due and payable at the time of filing such return. 
(5)  A taxpayer who has overpaid his income tax in any taxable year may request a refund provided, however, there is no other tax liability and provided, further, that no amount of less than $1.00 will be refunded or collected. 
(6)  All returns must by postmarked by the due date for the return. If the due date falls on a weekend or federal holiday, the due date shall be the next business day. 
(e)  Extensions. For tax years prior to 2004, the Finance Director shall have the authority to extend the time for filing of the annual return upon the request of the taxpayer for a period not to exceed six months, or one month beyond any extension requested of or granted by the Internal Revenue Service for the filing of the federal income tax return. For taxable years 2004 and later, the extended due date for individuals shall be the last day of the month following the month to which federal income tax due date has been extended. If a business has filed and extension request through the Ohio Business Gateway the extended due date shall be the last day of the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return has been extended. If not filed through the Ohio Business Gateway, the extended due date shall be the last day of the month following the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return has been extended. A taxpayer may request an extension by filing a copy of the taxpayer's request for a federal filing extension, or by filing a written request. The Finance Director may deny the extension if the taxpayer's income tax account with the City is delinquent in any way. The Finance Director may require a tentative return, accompanied by payment of the amount of the tax shown to be due thereon by the date the return is normally due. Interest but no penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax paid within the period as extended. 
(f)  A taxpayer shall file information returns, schedules and statement required to support tax returns, which are incomplete without such information within the time limits set forth for the filing of the tax returns, and the failure to file such information returns, schedules and statements shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. However, the taxpayer shall have ten days after notification by the Finance Director to file the items required by this section. 
(g)  All employers that provide any contractual service within the City, and who employ subcontractors in conjunction with that service, shall provide the City the names and addresses of the subcontractors. The subcontractors shall be responsible for all income tax withholding requirements under this chapter. 
(h)  Any business, profession, association or corporation reporting a net loss is subject to the filing requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  The officer(s) or employee(s) of such employer having control or supervision or charged with the responsibility of making the return and/or payment (including any tax, penalties, or interest due as required herein), shall be personally liable for failure to do so. The dissolution, bankruptcy or reorganization of any such employer does not discharge an officer's or employee's liability for a prior failure of such business to make the return and/or or pay taxes, penalties, or interest due. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.06 - AMENDED RETURNS AND REFUNDS. 
(a)  Where an amended return must be filed in order to report additional income and pay an additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in Section 181.05. Such amended return shall on a form obtainable on request from the Finance Director. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting (i.e., cash or accrual) or apportionment of net profits after the date for filing the original return. 
(b)  Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's Municipal tax liability, such taxpayer shall make and file an amended Municipal return showing income subject to the Municipal tax based upon such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any addition tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.07 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE. 
(a)  Each employer within or doing business within the City shall deduct at the time of payment of such income the tax of three-fourths of one percent of the income due by the employer or to the employee and shall make a return showing the amount of taxes so deducted and a record of payments showing that all taxes deducted during the quarter have been paid to the City in accordance with the payment schedule prescribed by subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in fact been withheld. Every employer or officer of a corporation is deemed to be a trustee for this City in collecting and holding the tax required under this chapter to be withheld and the funds so collected by such withholding are deemed to be trust funds. 
(c)  Employers shall pay to the City all income taxes withheld or required to be withheld on either a semimonthly, monthly or quarterly basis depending on the amount of taxes involved according to the following payment schedule: 
(1)  Semimonthly payments of the taxes required to be withheld are to be made by an employer if: 
A.  The total taxes required to be withheld in the prior calendar year were $12,000.00 or more and the employer was required to withhold for each month of the calendar year, or 
B.  If the employer was not required to withhold for each month of the previous calendar year, the amount of taxes required to be withheld for the final quarter was $3,000.00 or more. 
C.  Such payment shall be paid to the City within five banking days after the fifteenth and the last day of the month. 
(2)  Monthly payment of taxes withheld shall be made by an employer if the taxes withheld were less than the amounts specified in subsections (c)(1)A and B above, but equaled or exceeded $1,200.00 in accordance with the other provisions of subsection (c)(1)A, or equaled or exceeded $300.00 in accordance with the other provisions of subsection (c)(1)B. Such monthly payments shall be made to the City within 15 days after the close of each calendar month. 
(d)  All employers not required to make semimonthly or monthly payments of taxes withheld under subsection (c) hereof shall make quarterly payments no later than the last day of the month following the end of each quarter. 
(e)  Each employer, on or before February 28, unless a written request for a 30 days extension, is made to and granted by the Finance Director following any calendar year in which such deduction have been made, or should have been made by an employer, shall file with the Finance Director an information return for each employee from who income tax has been or should have been withheld showing the name and address of the employee, the total amount of income paid the employee during the year and the amount of the Municipal income tax withheld from each employee. 
(f)  Where a resident of the City performs services for the employer in another municipality, which services are subject to withholding in the other municipality, the employer shall have the authority to reduce the withholding to the City to the extent of the tax liability in the other municipality. 
(g)  The officer or the employee having control or supervision of withholding the tax, filing the report, and/or making payment is personally liable for failure to file the report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The dissolution of a corporation does not discharge an officer's or employee's liability for a prior failure of the corporation to file returns or pay tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.08 - DECLARATIONS. 
(a)  Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to Section 181.07 and/or from which tax will not be fully withheld, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity subject to the tax imposed by Section 181.04, shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated profit or loss from such business activity together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any; provided, however, if a person's income is wholly from income from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to the City in accordance with Section 181.07, such person need not file a declaration. 
(b)  Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the life of this chapter, or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(c)  Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal year period. 
(d)  Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by or obtainable from the Finance Director or on an acceptable generic form as defined in this chapter. Credit shall be taken for the City's tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. In accordance with the provisions of Section 181.13, credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or be withheld and remitted to another taxing municipality. 
(e)  The original declaration, or any subsequent amendment thereof, may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as provided herein. 
(f)  If the taxpayer is an individual, such declarations of estimated tax to be paid the City shall be accompanied by a payment of a least one-fourth of the estimated tax, and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before the last day of the seventh, tenth, and thirteenth months after the beginning of the taxable year; provided, however, that in case an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. 
(g)  If the taxpayer is a corporation, association, or other business entity, at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth, and twelfth months of the taxable year; provided, however, that in case an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. 
(h)  The Finance Director shall not assess penalty and interest for not filing a declaration: 
(1)  On any resident taxpayer who was not domiciled in the City on the first day of January in the year in which they became subject to filing a Declaration and making estimated payments; 
(2)  If a taxpayer has remitted an amount equal to 100 percent of the previous year's tax liability, provided that the previous year reflected a 12-month period and the taxpayer filed a return for that year; 
(3)  On estimated payments if the taxpayer has remitted, by the fourth estimated payment due date, an amount equal to 90 percent of the final tax liability for the tax year due. 
(4)  Compliance with subsections (h)(2) and (3) above does not exempt assessments for late estimated payments. 
(i)  A declaration of estimated tax which is less than 90 percent of the tax shown on the final return shall not be considered in good faith. The difference shall be subject to penalties and interest as provided for in Section 181.14. 
(j)  The Finance Director may eliminate the requirement to file declarations in instances where a certain minimum amount of tax is not due. The Finance Director shall establish said minimum tax requiring filing by rule and advise the Regional Income tax Authority (RITA) of said minimum filing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.09 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR. 
(a)  The Finance Director shall collect and receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed by this chapter, and he/she shall also keep an accurate record for a minimum of six years showing payment received by him from each taxpayer and the date of the payment. 
(b)  The Finance Director is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and they are hereby empowered to adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns and payments. Taxpayers are hereby required to comply with said rules and regulations. 
(c)  In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or failed to pay the tax due on a return or has filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Finance Director may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the City from the taxpayer based on any information in the Finance Director's possession and shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any. Such determination may be modified or amended based upon information or data subsequently secured by or made available to the Finance Director. If the taxpayer fails to respond to the assessment within 30 days, the tax, penalties, and interest assessed shall become due and payable and collectible as are other unpaid taxes, penalties, and interest. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.10 - INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR. 
(a)  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or person subject to, or who the Finance Director believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter, every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to furnish within ten days following a written request by the Finance Director the means, facilities and opportunity for making such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. 
(b)  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have knowledge of the facts to appear before him and may examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. For this purpose, the Finance Director may compel the production of books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he/she believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry. 
(c)  The refusal to produce books, papers, records and copies of federal and state income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by an employer or person subject or presumed to be subject to the tax, or by an officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section or with an order or subpoena of the Finance Director authorized hereby, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or her tax liability for a period of six years from the date his or her return is filed or the withholding taxes are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.11 - TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL. 
    Any information gained as the result of any returns, investigations hearing or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential, except for official tax purposes, or except in accordance with proper judicial order, or except as hereinafter provided. The Finance Director may furnish the Internal Revenue Service, Treasury Department of the United States, the Finance Director of Ohio, and the duly authorized income Finance Director of any other city or state with copies of the returns filed. The Finance Director is also authorized to enter into agreements for the exchange of any information with any of the foregoing federal, state or Municipal officials. Any person divulging information, except as herein before authorized, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a third degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.12 - COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES. 
(a)  All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible together with any interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are recoverable. 
(b)  The Finance Director is authorized to institute civil law suits to collect delinquent taxes due and owing the City by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. The Finance Director is authorized to waive penalties and interest and compromise tax liability and the right to accept waiver of state statutes of limitation. 
(c)  Except in the case of fraud, omission of 25 percent of income subject to this tax or failure to file a return, an additional assessment shall not be made after three years from the time the return was due or filed, whichever is later. In the case of fraud, omission of 25 percent or more of income subject to this tax, or failure to file a return, all additional assessments shall be made and all prosecutions to recover Municipal income taxes and penalties and interest thereon shall be brought within six years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later. However, in those cases in which the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of limitations, the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the Finance Director shall be one year from the time of the final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(d)  Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is made within three years from the date when such payment was made or the return was due or within three months after final determination of the Federal tax liability. Taxes erroneously paid shall include amounts erroneously paid by or on the behalf of persons who are not Resident Individuals and who are not subject to tax for income earned in the City; claims for refunds for such amounts must be made within three years from the date when such payment was made or within three months after final determination of the Federal tax liability. In addition, the following shall apply regarding refunds of tax withheld from non-qualified deferred compensation plans (NDCP): 
(1)  A taxpayer may be eligible for a refund if the taxpayer has suffered a loss from a NDCP. The loss will be considered sustained only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to the NDCP. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and property will be made by the NDCP. 
(2)  A taxpayer who receives income as a result of payments from a NDCP, and that income is less than the amount of income deferred to the NDCP and upon which municipal tax was withheld, then a refund will be issued on the amount representing the difference between the deferred income that was taxed and the income received from the NDCP. If different tax rates applied to the tax years in which deferrals, a weighted average of the different tax rates will be used to compute the refund amount. 
(3)  Refunds shall be allowed only if the loss is attributable to the bankruptcy of the employer who had established the NDCP, or the employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified compensation. 
(e)  Income tax that has been deposited with the City, but should have been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by City as a refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds. Income tax that should have been deposited with the City, but was deposited with another municipality, shall be subject to recovery by the City. The City will allow a non-refundable credit for any amount owed the City that is in excess of the amount to be refunded by the other municipality, as long as the tax rate of the other municipality is the same or higher than the City's tax rate. If the City's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of the rates is also subject to collection by the City. 
(f)  In the case of delinquencies, payments received shall first by applied to delinquent penalties and interest, beginning with the oldest delinquency. Upon satisfaction of this debt, payments shall then be applied to delinquent taxes, beginning with the oldest delinquency. 
(g)  Additional amounts of less than $1.00 shall not be refunded or assessed unless such assessment results from income which the taxpayer has failed to report. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2018-40 ,  1, 9-4-2018) 
181.13 - CREDITS. 
    Every individual taxpayer who resides in the City but who received net profits and income for work done or services performed or rendered outside of the City, if it be made to appear that he/she had paid a municipal income tax or excise tax based on income, on such net profits and income in another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for the amount so paid by him or in the taxpayer's behalf in such other municipality, but the credit shall not exceed one-fourth of one percent of the tax assessed by this chapter. The net tax due the City after application of the credit shall be a minimum one-half percent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.14 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES; VIOLATIONS. 
(a)  All taxes imposed, and all moneys withheld or required to be withheld by employers under the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after they become due shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of the unpaid tax, at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction of a month thereof. 
(b)  In addition to interest as provided in subsection (a) hereof, penalties based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows: 
(1)  For failure to pay tax due, other than taxes withheld, one percent per month or fraction of a month thereof. 
(2)  For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees, three percent per month or fraction of a month thereof. The total penalty shall not exceed 50 percent of the tax due. 
(3)  Any person required to file a tax return with the City and who fails to file, or to timely file, a return shall be liable to pay a penalty to $50.00 for the first instance and $100.00 for each subsequence instance, even if no tax is found to be due. 
(4)  A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by the Finance Director when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Finance Director; provided further, that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three months after final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(c)  The Finance Director or the Board of Appeal may abate penalty or interest or both. 
(d)  In no case shall penalty and interest charges be levied when the total of such penalty and interest is less than $1.00. 
(e)  Any person required to withhold the tax, who knowingly fails to withhold such tax or pay over such tax or knowingly attempts in any manner to evade or defeat such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable to a penalty equal to the total amount of the tax evaded or not withheld or not paid over. No other penalty under this section shall be applied to any offense to which this penalty is applied. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  No person shall: 
A.  Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter. 
B.  Make an incomplete, false, or fraudulent return. 
C.  Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, or interest imposed by this chapter. 
D.  Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold the tax from his employees and remit the withholding tax to the Finance Director. 
E.  Refuse to permit the Finance Director or any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his or his employer's books, records, papers, and federal and/or state income tax returns. 
F.  Fail to appear before the Finance Director and to produce his or his employer's books, records, papers, or federal and/or state income tax returns upon order or subpoena of the Finance Director. 
G.  Refuse to disclose to the Finance Director any information with respect to the person's or the person's employer's income or net profits. 
H.  Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the Finance Director. 
I.  Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment on the estimated tax for any year as required by Section 181.08. 
J.  Fail to cause the tax withheld from the wages of employees to be paid to the City in accordance with the provisions of Section 181.07. 
K.  Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties, or interest imposed by this chapter. 
(2)  Whoever violates Subsection 181.14(f)(1) shall for the first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250.00 and/or imprisonment not more than three months, or both. Each subsequent offense shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree, resulting in fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment not more than six months, or both. 
(3)  Any employee of the City who violates the provisions of the chapter relative to the disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.15 - MUNICIPAL CONTRACTS. 
    Contract Provisions. No contract on behalf of the City for works or improvements of the City shall be binding or valid unless such contract contains the following: 
"Said _______ hereby further agrees to withhold all Municipal income taxes due or payable under the provisions of Ordinance 89-18, including updates, of the City for wages, salaries and commission paid to its employees and further agrees to any of its subcontractors shall be required to agree to withhold any such Municipal income taxes due under such chapter for services performed under this contract." 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.16 - BOARD OF APPEAL. 
(a)  A Board of Appeal of three members is hereby created, consisting of the Mayor, the Chairman of the Council Finance Committee, and an additional Council member of the Finance Committee chosen by the Mayor and the Chairman of the Council Finance Committee. 
(b)  All rules and regulations and amendments or charges thereto, which are adopted by the Finance Director under the authority conferred by this chapter, must be approved by the Board of Appeal before the same become effective. After such approval, such rules, regulations, amendments and changes shall be filled with the Clerk of Council and shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  The Board of Appeal shall elect from its members, a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and a Secretary. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its transactions. All hearings upon appeal by the Board shall be conducted privately, unless a private hearing is requested by the taxpayer, and the provisions of Section 181.11 with reference to the confidential character of information required to be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before the Board on appeal. 
(d)  Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Finance Director, which is made under the authority conferred by this chapter and the rules and regulations, and who has filed the required returns or other documents pertaining to the contested issue, may appeal therefrom to the Board of Appeal within 30 days from the announcement of the ruling or decision by the Finance Director. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state why the decision should be deemed incorrect or unlawful. The Board shall, on hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify any ruling or decision or any part thereof. The Board must schedule a hearing within 45 calendar days of receiving the appeal. The Board must issue a written decision within 90 days after the final hearing and send a notice of its decision by ordinary mail to the taxpayer within 15 days after issuing the decision. 
(e)  Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Board of Appeal may appeal the decision therefrom to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days from the announcement of such ruling or decision. For matters relating to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, any ruling or decision of the Board of Appeal may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction or to the State Board of Tax Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.17 - SAVINGS CLAUSE. 
    If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this chapter, or any tax against any individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council of the City that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section, or part thereof not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.18 - COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER. 
(a)  This chapter shall continue in effect insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until the same has been repealed. Insofar as the collection of taxes levied or enforcing any provision of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue in effect until all of such taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of such taxes, or for the punishment of violations of this chapter, shall have been fully terminated. The provisions of Section 181.17(a) are subject to the limitations contained in Sections 181.12 and 181.14. 
(b)  Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter shall be due on the dates provided in Sections 181.04 through 181.05, as though the same were continuing. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
181.19 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Council of the City adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules and Regulations for use as the City's Income Tax Rules and Regulations, and they are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this chapter. In the event of a conflict with any provision(s) of the City's Income Tax Chapter and the RITA Rules and Regulations, the chapter will supersede. Until and if the contractual relationship between the City and RITA ceases, Section 181.19 will supersede all other provisions within Chapter 181 regarding promulgation of Rules and Regulations by the Finance Director and approval of same by the Board of Appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-7-2007) 
CHAPTER 182 - MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016[20] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference- Payroll deductions, O.R.C.  9.42; Municipal income taxes, O.R.C. Ch. 718; State income tax, O.R.C. Ch. 5747 

182.01 - AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE. 
182.011 - AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX. 
(a)  The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter 182 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this Chapter 182 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and limitations of O.R.C. Ch. 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the provisions of O.R.C. Ch. 718. 
(b)  The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The Municipality shall tax income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on Municipal Taxable Income, as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.012 - PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE. 
(a)  To establish funding for the purposes of general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements, the City of Powell hereby levies an annual municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The annual tax is levied at a rate of three-quarters of one percent. The tax is levied at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in Powell. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.013 - ALLOCATION OF FUNDS. 
Editor's note- Intentionally left blank. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.014 - STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX. 
(a)  Significant and wide-ranging amendments to O.R.C. 718 were enacted by Am Sub HB 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of O.R.C. 718 in order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal income tax. 
(b)  As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 2015-49, effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Chapter 182 in accordance with the provisions of O.R.C. 718 to allow the Municipality to continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on behalf of the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.02 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
(a)  Ordinance 2015-49, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding changes to O.R.C. 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this Chapter 182 apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years. 
(b)  Ordinance 2015-49 does not repeal the existing sections of Chapter 182 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather adds Chapter 182 effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016, the Municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the Municipality under O.R.C. 718 and ordinances and resolutions of the Municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code. 
    For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Adjusted Federal Taxable Income, for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation under Subsection 182.03(23)D., means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
A.  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
B.  Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted under subsection (1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
C.  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
D.  (i)  Except as provided in subsection (1)D.(ii) of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(ii)  Subsection (1)D.(i) of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
E.  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
F.  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
G.  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under Section 4313.02 of the Ohio Revised Code; 
H.  (i)  Except as limited by subsections 182.03(1)H.(ii), (iii) and (iv) of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 
The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized. 
(ii)  No person shall use the deduction allowed by subsection (1)H. of this section to offset qualifying wages. 
(iii)  (a)  For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more than 50 percent of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by subsection (1)H.(i) of this section. 
(b)  For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by Subsection 182.03(1)H.(i) of this section. 
(iv)  Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to subsection (1)H. of this section. 
(v)  Nothing in subsection (1)H.(iii)(a) of this section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of subsection (1)H.(iii)(a) of this section. To the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by operation of subsection (1)H.(iii)(a) of this section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in subsection (1)H.(iii)(a) of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward. 
I.  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with Subsection 182.063(e)(3)B. of this chapter. 
J.  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with Subsection 182.063(e)(3)B. of this chapter. 
If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in subsection (47)B. of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in subsection (23)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
Nothing in subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(2)  A.  Assessment means any of the following: 
(i)  A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation; 
(ii)  A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under Section 182.096(b)(2) of this chapter; 
(iii)  A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's request for use of an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section 182.062(b)(2) of this chapter; or 
(iv)  A Tax Administrator's requirement for a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section 182.062(b)(3) of this chapter. 
(v)  For purposes of subsection (2)A.(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of this section, an assessment shall commence the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to Section 182.18 of this chapter, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such finding. 
B.  Assessment does not include notice(s) denying a request for refund issued under Section 182.096(b)(3) of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria prescribed by subsection (2)A. of this section. 
(3)  Audit means the examination of a person or the inspection of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income tax. 
(4)  Board of Review has same meaning as "Local Board of Tax Review." 
(5)  Calendar quarter means the three-month period ending on the last day of March, June, September, or December. 
(6)  Casino operator and Casino facility have the same meanings as in Section 3772.01 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(7)  Certified Mail, Express Mail, United States Mail, Postal Service, and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to Section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(8)  Compensation means any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal services. 
(9)  Disregarded entity means a single member limited liability company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes. 
(10)  Domicile means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. 
(11)  Exempt income means all of the following: 
A.  The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of the United States or members of their reserve components, including the national guard of any state; 
B.  (i)  Except as provided in subsection (11)B.(ii) of this section, intangible income; 
(ii)  A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th general assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988. 
C.  Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in subsection (11)C. of this section, "unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
D.  The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-exempt activities. 
E.  Compensation paid under Section 3501.28 or 3501.36 of the Ohio Revised Code to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation does not exceed $1,000.00 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of $1,000.00 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation. 
F.  Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and similar organizations; 
G.  Alimony and child support received; 
H.  Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages; 
I.  Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to the tax levied under Section 5727.24 or 5727.30 of the Ohio Revised Code. Subsection (11)I. of this section does not apply for purposes of Chapter 5745 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
J.  Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income from the operation of a trade or business; 
K.  Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income under Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
L.  Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in subsection (34) of this section; 
M.  Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile. 
N.  Intentionally left blank. 
O.  Intentionally left blank. 
P.  (i)  Except as provided in subsections (11)P.(ii), (iii), and (iv) of this section, qualifying wages described in subsections (b)(1) or (e) of Section 182.052 of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the Municipality under either of those divisions. 
(ii)  The exemption provided in subsection (11)P.(i) of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages. 
(iii)  The exemption provided in subsection (11)P.(i) of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under subsection 182.052(d)(2) of this chapter. 
(iv)  The exemption provided in subsection (11)P.(i) of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply: 
(a)  For qualifying wages described in subsection 182.052(b)(1) of this chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in subsection 182.052(e) of this chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located; 
(b)  The employee receives a refund of the tax described in subsection (11)P.(iv)(a) of this section on the basis of the employee not performing services in that municipal corporation. 
Q.  (i)  Except as provided in subsection (11)Q.(ii) or (iii) of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for personal services performed in the Municipality on not more than 20 days in a taxable year. 
(ii)  The exemption provided in subsection (11)Q.(i) of this section does not apply under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The individual's base of operation is located in the Municipality. 
(b)  The individual is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of subsection (11)Q.(ii)(b) of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer," and "public figure" have the same meanings as in Section 182.052 of this chapter. 
(iii)  Compensation to which subsection (11)Q. of this section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled. 
(iv)  For purposes of subsection (11)Q. of this section, "base of operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation. 
R.  Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to Section 709.023 of the Ohio Revised Code on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence. 
S.  Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or laws of the United States. 
Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under subsection (11) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity's income. 
(12)  Form 2106 means internal revenue service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(13)  Generic form means an electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability, including a request for refund. 
(14)  Income means the following: 
A.  (i)  For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation including, but not limited to severance pay, from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in subsection (23)D. of this section. 
(ii)  For the purposes of subsection (14)A.(i) of this section: 
(a)  Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to subsection (14)A.(iv) of this section; 
(b)  The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year. 
(iii)  Subsection (14)A.(ii) of this section does not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' distributive shares of net profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in subsection (14)E. of this section. 
(iv)  Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer. 
B.  In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the Municipality, including any net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident. 
C.  For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer; 
D.  Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in Section 182.081 of this chapter. 
E.  For residents, an S corporation shareholder's distributive share of net profits of the S corporation to the extent the distributive share would be allocated or apportioned to this state under divisions (b)(1) and (2) of section 5733.05 of the Ohio Revised Code if the S corporation were a corporation subject to taxes imposed under Chapter 5733 of the Ohio Revised Code, and the tax shall apply to the distributive share of a shareholder of an S corporation in the hands of the shareholder of the S corporation. 
(15)  Intangible income means income of any of the following types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined in Chapter 5701 of the Ohio Revised Code, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. "Intangible income" does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance. 
(16)  Internal Revenue Code means the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended. 
(17)  Limited liability company means a limited liability company formed under Chapter 1705 of the Ohio Revised Code or under the laws of another state. 
(18)  Local Board of Tax Review and Board of Tax Review means the entity created under Section 182.18 of this chapter. 
(19)  Municipal corporation means, in general terms, a status conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under Sections 718.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(20)  A.  Municipal taxable income means the following: 
(i)  For a person other than an individual, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality under Section 182.062 of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the Municipality. 
(ii)  (a)  For an individual who is a resident of a Municipality other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in subsection (20)B. of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the Municipality. 
(b)  For an individual who is a resident of a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation from the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or before December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of Section 718.03 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(iii)  For an individual who is a nonresident of the Municipality, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality under Section 182.062 of this chapter, then reduced as provided in subsection (20)B. of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the Municipality. 
B.  In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in subsection (20)A.(ii)(a) or (iii) of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation. 
(21)  Municipality means the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(22)  Net operating loss means a loss incurred by a person in the operation of a trade or business. "Net operating loss" does not include unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss limitations. 
(23)  A.  Net profit for a person other than an individual means adjusted federal taxable income. 
B.  Net profit for a person who is an individual means the individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of subsection (23)A. of this section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (1)H. of this section. 
C.  For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding subsection (23)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity. 
D.  (i)  For purposes of this chapter, "publicly traded partnership" means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A "publicly traded partnership" may have any number of partners. 
(ii)  For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded partnership that makes the election described in subsection (23)D. of this section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership. 
(iii)  A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under division D.(iv) of this section. 
(iv)  An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period in effect under subsection D.(iii) of this section. The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period. 
(v)  The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but subsection D. of this section applies to all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership resides. 
(vi)  The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit. 
(24)  Nonresident means an individual that is not a resident of the Municipality. 
(25)  Ohio Business Gateway means the online computer network system, created under Section 125.30 of the Ohio Revised Code, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment system. 
(26)  Other payer means any person, other than an individual's employer or the employer's agent that pays an individual any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino operators and video lottery terminal sales agents. 
(27)  Pass-through entity means a partnership not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity" does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity. 
(28)  Pension means any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form. 
(29)  Person includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity. 
(30)  Postal service means the United States Postal Service, or private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item. 
(31)  Postmark date, Date of postmark , and similar terms include the date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or document was given to the delivery service for delivery 
(32)  A.  Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the Municipality that was adopted by the Municipality before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated in such Municipality in future taxable years. 
B.  For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully utilized, whichever is earlier. 
(33)  Qualified municipal corporation means a municipal corporation that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by Section 5747.01 of the Ohio Revised Code, as the income subject to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax. 
(34)  Qualifying wages means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows: 
A.  Deduct the following amounts: 
(i)  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(ii)  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer. 
(iii)  Intentionally Left blank. 
(iv)  Intentionally left blank. 
(v)  Any amount included in wages that is exempt income. 
B.  Add the following amounts: 
(i)  Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986. 
(ii)  Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased under a stock option. Subsection (34)B.(ii) of this section applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income. 
(iii)  Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount described in Section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Subsection (34)B.(iii) of this section applies only to employee contributions and employee deferrals. 
(iv)  Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation benefits described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not included in wages. 
(v)  Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with Section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(vi)  Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply: 
(a)  For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under Section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(b)  For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(c)  For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute wages; and 
(d)  For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either subsection (34)B. of this section or Section 718.03 of the Ohio Revised Code, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23, 2015. 
(35)  Related entity means any of the following: 
A.  An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's family enumerated in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50 percent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
B.  A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50 percent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
C.  A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation under subsection (35)D. of this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, at least 50 percent of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock; 
D.  The attribution rules described in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in subsections (35)A-C. of this section have been met. 
(36)  Related member means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member as defined in Section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "20 percent" shall be substituted for "five percent" wherever "five percent" appears in Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(37)  Resident means an individual who is domiciled in the Municipality as determined under Section 182.042 of this chapter. 
(38)  S Corporation means a person that has made an election under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year. 
(39)  Schedule C means internal revenue service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(40)  Schedule E means internal revenue service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(41)  Schedule F means internal revenue service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(42)  Single member limited liability company means a limited liability company that has one direct member. 
(43)  Small employer means any employer that had total revenue of less than $500,000.00 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting principles. "Small employer" does not include the federal government; any state government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes. 
(44)  Tax administrator means the individual charged with direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the following: 
A.  A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another municipal corporation; 
B.  A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; 
C.  The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency. 
(45)  Tax return preparer means any individual described in section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15. 
(46)  Taxable year means the corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(47)  A.  Taxpayer means a person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. "Taxpayer" does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in subsection (47)B.(i) of this section, a disregarded entity. 
B.  (i)  A single member limited liability company that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The limited liability company's single member is also a limited liability company. 
(b)  The limited liability company and its single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004. 
(c)  Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate taxpayer under division (L) of Section 718.01 of the Ohio Revised Code as this section existed on December 31, 2004. 
(d)  The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member. 
(e)  The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the election. 
(ii)  For purposes of subsection (47)B.(i)(e) of this section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.00. 
(48)  Taxpayers' rights and responsibilities means the rights provided to taxpayers in Sections 718.11 , 718.12 , 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011 , and 5717.03 of the Ohio Revised Code and any corresponding ordinances of the Municipality, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Chapter 718 of the Ohio Revised Code and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax. 
(49)  Video lottery terminal has the same meaning as in Section 3770.21 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(50)  Video lottery terminal sales agent means a lottery sales agent licensed under Chapter 3770 of the Ohio Revised Code to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state pursuant to Section 3770.21 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.04 - INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS. 
182.041 - DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS. 
(a)  "Municipal taxable income" for a resident of the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(1)  "Income" reduced by "exempt income" to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in subsection 182.03(20)B. of this chapter, further reduced by any "pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" equals "municipal taxable income." 
A.  "Income" is defined in Section 182.03(14) of this chapter. 
(i)  "Qualifying wages" is defined in Section 182.03(34). 
(ii)  "Net profit" is included in "income," and is defined in Section 182.03(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection 182.03(1)H. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in Section 182.062(E). 
(iii)  Section 182.03(14) provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in (14)A.(ii)(a); resident's distributive share of net profit from pass through entity treatment in (14)A.(ii)(b); treatment of S Corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder in (14)A.(iii); restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in (14)A.(iv). 
(iv)  "Pass-through entity" is defined in Section 182.03(27). 
B.  "Exempt income" is defined in Section 182.03(11) of this chapter. 
C.  Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in Section 182.03(20)B. of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in that section. 
D.  "Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" is defined in Section 182.03(32) of this chapter. 
(b)  "Municipal taxable income" for a nonresident of the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(1)  "Income" reduced by "exempt income" to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality as provided in Section 182.062 of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in Section 182.03(20)B. of this chapter, further reduced by any "pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" equals "municipal taxable income." 
A.  "Income" is defined in Section 182.03(14) of this chapter. 
(i)  "Qualifying wages" is defined in Section 182.03(34). 
(ii)  "Net profit" is included in "income," and is defined in Section 182.03(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in Subsection 182.03(1)(H). "Net profit" for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident. 
(iii)  "Pass-through entity" is defined in Section 182.03(27). 
B.  "Exempt income" is defined in Section 182.03(11) of this Chapter. 
C.  "Apportioned or sitused to the Municipality as provided in Section 182.062 of this chapter" includes the apportionment of net profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the Municipality. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in Section 182.062(e). 
D.  "Allowable employee business expense deduction" as described in Section 182.03(20)B. of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that section. For a nonresident of the Municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the nonresident in the Municipality. 
E.  "Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" is defined in Section 182.03(32) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.042 - DOMICILE. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Domicile" means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. 
(2)  An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the Municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the tax administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of the taxable year. 
(3)  An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in subsection (a)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of the taxable year. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The individual's domicile in other taxable years; 
(2)  The location at which the individual is registered to vote; 
(3)  The address on the individual's driver's license; 
(4)  The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's residence or domicile; 
(5)  The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual; 
(6)  Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the individual's residency; 
(7)  The primary location at which the individual is employed. 
(8)  The location of educational institutions attended by the individual's dependents as defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located; 
(9)  The number of contact periods the individual has with the Municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact period" with the Municipality if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode located outside of the Municipality and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the Municipality. For purposes of this section, the state's contact period test or bright-line test and resulting determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile. 
(c)  All applicable factors are provided in O.R.C.  718.012. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.043 - EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN JUDGES. 
(a)  Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from appropriated funds of this state. 
(b)  Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge. 
(Ord. 2015-49. Passed 10-20-15.) 
182.05 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE. 
182.051 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES. 
(a)  (1)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing business in the Municipality shall withhold from each employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the Municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the Municipality's income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under Section 182.052 of this chapter or subsection (d) or (f) of this section. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee. 
(2)  In addition to withholding the amounts required under subsection (a)(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident. 
(b)  (1)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the Municipality the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following schedule: 
A.  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required to make payments under division (b)(1)B. or (b)(1)C. of this section of taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
B.  Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399.00, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the Municipality in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200.00. Payments under division (b)(1)B. of this section shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each month. 
C.  Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted semimonthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted on behalf of the Municipality in the preceding calendar year exceeded $11,999.00, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the Municipality in any month of the receding calendar year exceeded $1,000.00. The payment under subsection (b)(1)C. of this section shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than one of the following: 
(i)  If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld during the first 15 days of a month, the third banking day after the fifteenth day of that month; 
(ii)  If the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld after the fifteenth day of a month and before the first day of the immediately following month, the third banking day after the last day of that month. 
D.  An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is required to make payment by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the employee for remittance to the Municipality if the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes withheld on payments to employees under section 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation. The payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's, agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this section. Once the threshold for remitting payment electronically for federal purposes has been met, any accrued municipal income tax withheld from employee qualifying wages earned within the Municipality shall be remitted to the Municipality at the same time that the federal tax withholding payment is due. 
E.  Upon written request and documentation of sufficient facts justifying the same, the Tax Administrator may modify the requirements set forth Section C. and D. hereinabove for certain employers and/or employees. No employer or employee may claim a modification unless it is in writing signed by the Tax Administrator, which may be limited in scope or expire on certain conditions or dates stated therein. 
(c)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this division shall be accepted by the Municipality as the return required of an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, unless the Municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers to file a tax return under Section 182.091 of this chapter. 
(d)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's successor entity. 
(e)  (1)  An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax. 
(2)  The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to remit to the Municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld. 
(f)  Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed. 
(g)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall be deemed to be held in trust for the Municipality until such time as the withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator. 
(h)  On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall file a Withholding Reconciliation Return with the Tax Administrator listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the Municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee's qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator. 
(i)  The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due. 
(j)  An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means. 
(k)  A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-56 , 11-15-2016) 
182.052 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT. 
(a)  The following terms as used in this section: 
(1)  Employer includes a person that is a related member to or of an employer. 
(2)  Professional athlete means an athlete who performs services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration. 
(3)  Professional entertainer means a person who performs services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(4)  Public figure means a person of prominence who performs services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(5)  Fixed location means a permanent place of doing business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or controlled by an employer. 
(6)  Worksite location means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20 days during the calendar year. "Worksite location" does not include the home of an employee. 
(7)  Principal place of work means the fixed location to which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place of work" means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of work" means the location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer. 
If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages subject to subsection (b)(1)A. of this section among those two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section. 
For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that division. 
(b)  (1)  Subject to subsections (c), (e), (f), and (g) of this section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies: 
A.  The employee's principal place of work is located in the Municipality. 
B.  The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite locations in the Municipality. For the purposes of this division, "presumed worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar year. Services can "reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days" if either of the following applies at the time the services commence: 
(i)  The nature of the services are such that it will require more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services. 
(ii)  The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the location for more than 20 days. 
C.  The employee is a resident of the Municipality and has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in Section 182.051 of this chapter. 
D.  The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the Municipality. 
(2)  For the purposes of subsection (b)(1) of this section, an employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of work: 
A.  Traveling to the location at which the employee will first perform services for the employer for the day; 
B.  Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing services for the employer to any other location; 
C.  Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer; 
D.  Transporting or delivering property described in subsection (b)(2)C. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer; 
E.  Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform services for the employer. 
(c)  If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is located. 
(d)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day threshold described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation. 
(2)  An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal corporation under subsection (d)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation. 
(3)  If an employer makes the election described in subsection (d)(2) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee. 
(e)  Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in Section 182.03 of this chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year. 
(f)  Subsections (b)(1) and (d) of this section shall not apply to the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of Section 182.051 of this chapter. 
(g)  In the case of a person performing personal services at a petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services on 12 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation for tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this division, a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard industrial classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining. 
Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an individual performs personal services at a petroleum refinery exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the municipal corporation for the first 12 days for which the employer paid qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar year on which the individual performed services at the refinery. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.053 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT. 
(a)  The Municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino operator, as defined in Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and Section 3772.01 of the Ohio Revised Code, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminals sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this section. 
(b)  If a person's winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue service of the amount is required by Section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's winnings at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located. 
(c)  Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed. 
(1)  On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the Municipality, providing the name, address, and social security number of the person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit electronically to the Municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month. 
(2)  Annually, on or before the 31st day of January, a casino operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located, indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period that information shall be indicated on the annual return. 
(3)  Annually, on or before the 31st day of January, a casino operator shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted from the person's winnings during the preceding year. The casino operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this division. The administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically. 
(4)  A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld. 
(5)  If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following: 
A.  A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; 
B.  A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts are due. 
If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 
(6)  The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the required amount from a person's winnings does not relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings. 
(d)  If a person's prize award from a video lottery terminal is an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue service is required by Section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's prize award at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery terminal facility is located. 
(e)  Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed. 
(1)  The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award the person's name, address, and social security number in order to facilitate the preparation of returns required by this section. 
(2)  On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the Municipality providing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month. 
(3)  A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts issued under subsection (e) of this section and shall make those records available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be maintained in accordance with Section 5747.17 of the Ohio Revised Code and any rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(4)  Annually, on or before the 31st day of January, each video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period that information shall be indicated on the annual return. 
(5)  Annually, on or before the 31st day of January, a video lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted and withheld from the person's prize award by the video lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically. 
(6)  A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld. 
(f)  If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the following: 
(1)  A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; 
(2)  A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts are due. 
If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 
(g)  The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the required amount from a person's prize award does not relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award. 
(h)  If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable penalty: 
(1)  For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50 percent of the tax deducted and withheld; 
(2)  For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual return, a penalty of $500.00 for each return not filed or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate prescribed in Section 5703.47 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(i)  Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of Section 182.07 of this chapter. This division applies only to the person for whom the amount is deducted and withheld. 
(j)  The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and returns required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.06 - INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX. 
182.061 - DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT INDIVIDUALS. 
    "Municipal taxable income" for a taxpayer who is not an individual for the Municipality is calculated as follows: 
(a)  "Income" reduced by "exempt income" to the extent otherwise included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any "pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" equals "municipal taxable income." 
(1)  "Income" for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the "net profit" of the taxpayer. 
(i)  "Net profit" for a person other than an individual is defined in Section 182.03(23). 
(ii)  "Adjusted Federal Taxable Income" is defined in Section 182.03(1) of this chapter. 
(2)  "Exempt income" is defined in Section 182.03(11) of this chapter. 
(3)  "Apportionment" means the apportionment as determined by Section 182.062 of this chapter. 
(4)  "Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" is defined in Section 182.03(32) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.062 - NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE APPORTIONMENT. 
    This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in the Municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under Chapter 5745 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(a)  Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the Municipality shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the Municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the Municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(2)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the Municipality to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under Section 182.052 of this chapter; 
(3)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the Municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(b)  (1)  If the apportionment factors described in subsection (a) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in the Municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the Municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 
A.  Separate accounting; 
B.  The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 
C.  The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the Municipality; 
D.  A modification of one or more of the factors. 
(2)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by subsection 182.19(a) of this chapter. 
(3)  A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by subsection 182.19(a) of this chapter. 
(4)  Nothing in subsection (b) of this section nullifies or otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and taxpayer before January 1, 2016. 
(c)  As used in subsection (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(1)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one of the following: 
A.  The employer; 
B.  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
C.  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in subsection (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(2)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer; 
(3)  Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows: 
(1)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following criteria: 
A.  The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation. 
B.  The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
C.  The property is shipped from a place within the municipal corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made. 
(2)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the municipal corporation. 
(3)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(4)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 
(5)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation. 
(e)  The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit resides. 
A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located. 
(f)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section, commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(2)  An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax return for that municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the extent that such credit is allowed under Section 182.081 of this chapter. 
(g)  If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation under subsections (11)L. and (34)A.(iv) of Section 182.03 of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. 
This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal corporation under this section. 
(h)  When calculating the ratios described in subsection (a) of this section for the purposes of that subsection or subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.063 - CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Affiliated group of corporations means an affiliated group as defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  Consolidated federal income tax return means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Consolidated federal taxable income means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Incumbent local exchange carrier has the same meaning as in Section 4927.01 of the Revised Code. 
(5)  Local exchange telephone service has the same meaning as in Section 5727.01 of the Revised Code. 
(b)  (1)  For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. 
A.  The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. 
B.  The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under subsection (b)(2) of this section; or 
C.  A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in effect under subsection (b)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(c)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(d)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(e)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (e)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in Section 182.03(1) of this chapter, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under subsection 182.03(1) of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least 80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
A.  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 182.062 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
B.  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 182.062 of this chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than 80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
A.  The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in Section 182.062 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 
B.  The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(f)  Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall make the computations required under Section 182.062 of this chapter by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(g)  Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(h)  Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.064 - TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO. 
    The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the Municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the Municipality derives from new employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the Municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.065 - TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION. 
    The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in the Municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the Municipality derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the Municipality passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.07 - DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Estimated taxes means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal corporation's income tax for the current taxable year. 
(2)  Tax liability means the total taxes due to a municipal corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year. 
(b)  (1)  Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.00. For the purposes of this section: 
A.  Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld. 
B.  An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, "date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service. 
C.  A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
D.  Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent under Section 718.031 of the Ohio Revised Code are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the taxpayer's winnings. 
(2)  Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of estimated taxes. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under subsection 182.091(g) of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal year or period. 
(5)  The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as provided in this section. 
(c)  (1)  The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows: 
A.  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 221/2 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
B.  On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 45 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
C.  On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 671/2 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
D.  On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, 90 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (c)(1)A-D. of this section. 
(3)  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the return in accordance with Section 182.091 of this chapter. 
A.  For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended pursuant to division (G) of Section 5747.08 of the Revised Code. 
B.  For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxable year or period. 
(4)  An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer's estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for the taxable year. 
(d)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to Section 182.10 of this chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in subsection (e) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
A.  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 221/2 percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
B.  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45 percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
C.  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 671/2 percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
D.  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90 percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty. 
(e)  An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under subsection (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90 percent of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100 percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal corporation under Section 182.091 of this chapter for that year. 
(3)  The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Municipality but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes the first day of the taxable year. 
(f)  A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.08 - CREDIT FOR TAX PAID. 
182.081 - CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY. 
    Every individual taxpayer who resides in the City but who received net profits and income from work done or services performed or rendered outside of the City, if it be made to appear that he/she had paid a municipal income tax or excise tax based on income, on such net profits and income in another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for the amount so paid by him or in the taxpayer's behalf in such other municipality, but the credit shall not exceed one-fourth of one percent of the tax assessed by this chapter. The net tax due the City after application of the credit shall be a minimum one-half percent. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.082 - REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Nonqualified deferred compensation plan means a compensation plan described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  A.  Except as provided in subsection (a)(2)B. of this section, qualifying loss means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer's receipt of money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
B.  If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the product of the amount resulting from the calculation described in subsection (a)(2)A. of this section computed without regard to subsection (a)(2)B. of this section and a fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
C.  With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(3)  Qualifying tax rate means the applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate. 
(2)  A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable years. 
(3)  If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(4)  In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(c)  (1)  For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(2)  Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the municipal corporation by the taxpayer. 
(d)  The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to: 
(1)  The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or 
(2)  The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.083 - CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OR ZONE. 
    A Municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident of the Municipality who works in a joint economic development zone created under Section 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under Section 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 of the Ohio Revised Code to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation, pursuant to Section 182.081 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.084 - CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND. 
(a)  Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the Municipality, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is allowable by the Municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds as provided in Section 182.096 of this chapter. 
(b)  Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the Municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall be subject to collection and recovery by the Municipality. To the extent a refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as provided in Section 182.096, the Municipality will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the Municipality claims is due. If the Municipality's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection by the Municipality, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment. 
(c)  No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in Section 182.096 of this chapter. 
(d)  Nothing in this section requires a Municipality to allow credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the Municipality has reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section 182.081 of this chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.09 - ANNUAL RETURN. 
182.091 - RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX. 
(a)  (1)  An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on municipal taxable income by the Municipality shall be completed and filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located in the Municipality under subsection 182.051(c) of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the Municipality. 
(3)  All resident individual taxpayers, shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the Municipality, regardless of income or liability. 
(b)  If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor, administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent. 
(c)  If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, the return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person. 
(d)  Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone number of the fiduciary. 
(e)  No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a joint return. 
(f)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040 or, in the case of a return or request required by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio IT 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed. 
(3)  A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. 
(4)  A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this section to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or a portal provided by Municipality. The department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division through the Ohio business gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The department shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this section to the appropriate Tax Administrator. 
(5)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required by the Municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under subsection (f) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(6)  Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses. 
(g)    
(1)  A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under division (G) of Section 5747.08 of the Ohio Revised Code. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the tax administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator. 
C.  In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount shown to be due is $10.00 or less. 
(2)  If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(3)  With respect to taxpayers to whom Section 182.092 of this chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts with any provision in Section 182.092 of this chapter, the provision in Section 182.092 of this chapter prevails. 
(h)  (1)  For taxable years beginning after 2015, the Municipality shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount due is $10.00 or less. 
(2)  Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the Municipality for a taxable year pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section shall file with the Municipality an annual net profit return under subsection (f)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(i)  (1)  If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment. "The date of postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service. 
(2)  If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment. 
(j)  The amounts withheld for the Municipality by an employer, the agent of an employer, or other payer as described in Section 182.051 of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld were not remitted to the Municipality and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld. 
(k)  Each return required by the Municipality to be filed in accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters. 
(l)  The Tax Administrator of the Municipality shall accept for filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the Municipality or Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of the Municipality's ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents. 
(m)  When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature. 
(n)  (1)  As used in this division, "worksite location" has the same meaning as in Section 182.052 of this chapter. 
(2)  A person may notify a tax administrator that the person does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply: 
A.  The person was required to file a tax return with the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this chapter. The tax administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The person no longer provides services in the municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation's income tax for the taxable year. 
The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed services or made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall include the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal corporation's resolutions, ordinances, or rules." The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury. 
C.  If a person submits an affidavit described in subsection (n)(2) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any tax return for the taxable year unless the tax administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that results in municipal taxable income reportable to the Municipality in the taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in subsection (n) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person. 
(o)  Any person, including corporations, partnerships, employers, estates and trusts, who files 250 or more information returns of form W-2 for any calendar year, must file these returns using magnetic media or such other process as determined acceptable to the Director of Finance. All requirements apply separately to both original and corrected forms. 
(p)  In addition to the above wage reporting requirements, any person paying money to an individual or independent contractor shall report such payment. The information should be reported on Federal Form 1099 and filed yearly with the Tax Administrator on or before February 28th. Any return not so filed shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Section 182.10(c)(4) of this chapter. In addition to the late filing penalty, any return which remains un-filed more than two months after its due date shall be subject to the penalties provided under Section 182.99 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-56 , 11-15-2016) 
182.092 - RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE. 
(a)  Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the Municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter during the period of the member's or civilian's duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension. 
(b)  (1)  If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate. 
(2)  If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax otherwise due to the Municipality before the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. 
(3)  Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under subsection (b)(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. 
(c)  (1)  Nothing in this subsection denies to any person described in this division the application of subsection (a) and (b) of this section. 
(2)  A.  A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under subsection (c)(2)A. of this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section, "qualifying taxpayer" means a member of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces. 
B.  Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with subsection (c)(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under subsection (c)(2)A. of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax. 
(d)  For each taxable year to which subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of subsection (b)(2) and (3) or (c) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.093 - USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED. 
(a)  Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(b)  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(c)  Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax. 
(d)  The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.094 - EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE. 
(a)  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. 
(b)  Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for a period other than six months for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return. 
(c)  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the tax administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the tax administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the tax administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension. 
(d)  An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that date. 
(e)  If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for filing state income tax returns under division (G) of Section 5747.08 of the Ohio Revised Code, a taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.095 - AMENDED RETURNS. 
(a)  (1)  A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return to determine the tax due levied by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter must be altered. 
(2)  Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is $10.00 or less. 
(3)  If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the amended return. 
(b)  (1)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10.00 or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided under subsection (b)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under Section 182.19 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return. 
(2)  The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened. 
(c)  (1)  In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by subsection (a)(2) of this section for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is $10.00 or less, no refund need be paid by the Municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in Section 182.096 of this chapter. Except as set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return. 
(2)  The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.096 - REFUNDS. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the Municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied by the Municipality: 
(1)  Overpayments of more than $10.00; 
(2)  Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10.00. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any documentation that substantiates the taxpayer's claim for a refund must be included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of undocumented credits or losses. 
(2)  On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment. 
(3)  If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under Section 182.18 of this chapter. 
(4)  Requests for refund of any amounts erroneously paid by a person who is not a resident, and who does not have municipal taxable income as a nonresident pursuant to 182.041(b), must be filed with the Tax Administrator within three years after the payment was made, No interest shall be due on any such refund. 
(c)  A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be considered to have been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist: 
(1)  The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request. 
(2)  The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day. 
(3)  The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven days of the last day for making the request. 
(d)  Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90 days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in Subsection 182.10(a)(4) of this chapter. 
(e)  As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same meaning as in Section 182.10 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 2018-40 ,  2, 9-4-2018) 
182.10 - PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Applicable law means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the Municipality provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing requirements of a municipal income tax. 
(2)  Federal short-term rate means the rate of the average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under Section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year. 
(3)  Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(4)  Interest rate as described in subsection (a) of this section means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus five percent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(5)  Return includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(6)  Unpaid estimated income tax means estimated income tax due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(7)  Unpaid income tax means income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(8)  Unpaid withholding tax means withholding tax due but not paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(9)  Withholding tax includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying wages. 
(b)  (1)  This section shall apply to the following: 
A.  Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; 
B.  Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to be paid or remitted to the Municipality on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; 
(2)  This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of this Municipality. 
(c)  The Municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make to the Municipality timely and full payment or remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the Municipality any return required to be filed. 
(1)  Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as "interest rate as described in subsection (a) of this section," per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month. 
(2)  With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax, a penalty equal to 15 percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed. 
(3)  With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed. 
(4)  With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the Municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of $25.00 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed a total of $150.00 in assessed penalty for each failure to timely file a return. 
(d)  With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality shall not impose, seek to collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not described in this section. 
(e)  With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016. 
(f)  The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such abatement or partial abatement. 
(g)  The Municipality shall impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer the Municipality's post-judgment collection costs and fees, including attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.11 - AUDIT. 
(a)  At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in Section 182.03(3) of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced. 
(b)  Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable alternative dates for the audit. 
(c)  At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. 
A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(d)  A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit examination. 
(e)  The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case. 
(f)  If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from the audit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.12 - ROUNDING. 
    A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds $0.50 cents shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a dollar that is less than $0.50 cents shall be dropped, rounding down to the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.13 - AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR. 
182.131 - AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR. 
    The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter, including without limitation: 
(a)  Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter; 
(b)  Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties; 
(c)  Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their respective official duties as provided by law; 
(d)  Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter; 
(e)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax claims; 
(f)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with Section 182.062 of this chapter; 
(g)  Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final; 
(h)  Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner authorized by law; 
(i)  Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding obligations described in Section 182.051 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.132 - AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT OVER TIME. 
(a)  As used in this section, "claim" means a claim for an amount payable to the Municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the Municipality: 
(1)  Compromise a claim; 
(2)  Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require. 
(c)  The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable. 
(d)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the liability of any other person. 
(e)  (1)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement. 
(f)  The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer's failure to provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.133 - AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(b)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the Municipality or for the withholding of such tax. 
(c)  The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(d)  No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.134 - AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information. 
(b)  (1)  If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom the request was directed pursuant to Section 182.10 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in Section 182.99 of this chapter. 
(2)  If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with respect to that information as required under subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to Section 182.10 of this chapter. 
(3)  The penalties provided for under subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in Section 182.99 of this chapter for a violation of Section 182.15 of this chapter, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.14 - CONFIDENTIALITY. 
(a)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by O.R.C. 718 or by the Charter or ordinance of the Municipality is confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the official business of the Municipality as authorized by O.R.C. 718 or the Charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the Municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations. 
(b)  This section does not prohibit the Municipality from publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.15 - FRAUD. 
    No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the Municipality or the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.16 - OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR. 
(a)  An "opinion of the Tax Administrator" means an opinion issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator. 
(b)  A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax Administrator shall be an "opinion of the Tax Administrator" and shall bind the Tax Administrator, in accordance with subsections (c), (g), and (h) of this section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The taxpayer's request fully and accurately describes the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts. 
(2)  The request relates to a tax imposed by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax Administrator and designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator." 
(c)  An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates: 
(1)  The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later; 
(2)  The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the Municipality's income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator; 
(3)  The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the Municipality's income tax ordinance; 
(4)  If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or regulations; 
(5)  The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material facts or circumstances; 
(6)  The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified in the opinion. 
(d)  (1)  A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts. 
(2)  If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the Municipality in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of Section 182.15 of this chapter. 
(e)  If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the opinion shall include a statement that: 
(1)  The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change for any of the reasons stated in subsection (c) of this section; 
(2)  It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes. 
(f)  A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request received under this section. 
(g)  This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016. 
(h)  An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation. 
(i)  A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties involved in the activity or transaction. 
(j)  An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a refusal to offer an opinion under subsection (f) may not be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.17 - ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY. 
(a)  (1)  The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under Section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(2)  The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be authorized by the person subject to the assessment. 
(3)  Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator as prescribed in Section 718.18 of the Revised Code is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the assessment is served. 
(b)  (1)  A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least 20 percent, as determined by voting rights, of the addressee's business. 
(2)  If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.18 - LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. 
(a)  (1)  The legislative authority of the Municipality shall maintain a Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 718. 
(2)  The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. 
Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the Municipality, and may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the Municipality at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality. This member may be an employee of the Municipality, but may not be the director of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof. 
(3)  The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative authority of the Municipality shall be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality shall serve at the discretion of the administrative official. 
(4)  Members of the board of tax review appointed by the legislative authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in Section 718.11(A)(4) of the Revised Code. 
(5)  A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign immediately by operation of law. 
(6)  A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board. 
(7)  If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member's place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve. 
(b)  Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed. 
(c)  Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the taxpayer receives the assessment. 
(d)  The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under subsection (c) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise. 
(e)  The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the board's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the board's final determination as provided in Section 5717.011 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(f)  The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs, and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records available for inspection under Section 149.43 of the Ohio Revised Code. For this reason, any documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code. For this reason, such hearings shall not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present during the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.19 - ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS. 
(a)    
(1)  A.  Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the latter of: 
(i)  Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later; or 
(ii)  One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral period, if any. 
B.  The time limit described in subsection (a)(1)A. of this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit described in subsection (C) of this section. 
(2)  As used in this section, "qualifying deferral period" means a period of time beginning and ending as follows: 
A.  Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in Section 182.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that assessment. 
B.  Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken. 
(b)  Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of 25 percent or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the offense. 
(c)  A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within the time limitation provided in Section 182.096 of this chapter. 
(d)  (1)  Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the Municipality does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal. 
(2)  If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created under Section 182.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant's assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by Section 182.096 of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by subsection (d) of this section. 
(e)  No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; 
(2)  The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.20 - ADOPTION OF RULES. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 718.30 of the Revised Code, the Municipality, pursuant to this chapter, grants authority to the Tax Administrator, to adopt rules to administer the income tax imposed by the Municipality. 
(b)  All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the internet. 
(1)  RITA Rules and Regulations. The Council of the City adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules and Regulations for use as the City's Income Tax Rules and Regulations, and they are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this chapter. In the event of a conflict with any provision(s) of the City's Income Tax Chapter and the RITA Rules and Regulations, this chapter will supersede. Until and if the contractual relationship between the City and RITA ceases, Section 182.20(b)(1) will supersede all other provisions within Chapter 182 regarding promulgation of Rules and Regulations by the Finance Director and approval of same by the Board of Tax Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.21 - LANDLORD REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  All property owners of real property of any kind located within the City who rent to tenants of houses, apartments, rooms, trailer parks, or other residential or commercial rental accommodations, shall file with the Tax Administrator a report showing the name, address, telephone number, and place of employment of each such tenant within 30 days after a new tenant occupies said rental property. 
(1)  Within 30 days after a tenant vacates such house, apartment, room, trailer park, or other residential or commercial rental property located within the City, the owner of such vacated rental property shall file with the Tax Administrator a report showing the date of vacation of said rental property by said tenant and identifying each such vacating tenant. 
(2)  Late filing or refusal by any property owner of rental property of any kind located within the City to submit such information as set forth in the paragraphs above will be punished by fines, as prescribed by Section 182.10(a)(5) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.60 - FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER. 
(a)  A taxpayer may elect to be subject to Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply: 
(1)  The state Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole Administrator of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as defined in 182.61(c) of this chapter is liable for the term of the election; 
(2)  The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to O.R.C.  718.80 to 718.95, Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, and any applicable provision of O.R.C. Chapter 5703. 
(b)  (1)  A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the City on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(2)  A.  The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and the City of its termination of the election. 
B.  A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any taxable year. 
C.  Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(c)  The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer Sections 182.60 to 182.75 this chapter. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the Tax Commissioner by law, the Tax Commissioner may: 
(1)  Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections; 
(2)  Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to carry out those sections; 
(3)  Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections. 
(d)  The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a Tax Administrator, as that term is defined in O.R.C.  718.01 and Section 182.03 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.61 - DEFINITIONS. 
    If a term used in Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the use of the term in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code, unless the term is defined in Chapter 5703 of the Ohio Revised Code, in which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this section and Section 182.03 of this chapter, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of that term in Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter. 
    As used in Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter only: 
(a)  Municipal taxable income means income apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under Section 182.062 of this chapter, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the municipal corporation. 
(b)  Adjusted federal taxable income, for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation as described in division (D)(5) of O.R.C.  718.01 and Section 182.03(23)D. of this chapter, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(1)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
(2)  Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted under subsection (b)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  A.  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4)B. of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
B.  Subsection (b)(4)A. of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(6)  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(7)  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under O.R.C.  4313.02. 
(8)  Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income. 
(9)  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with Section 182.063(e)(3)B. of this chapter. 
(10)  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with Section 182.063(e)(3)B. of this chapter. 
If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in Section 182.03(47)B. of this chapter, and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in Section 182.03(23)D. of this chapter, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
Nothing in subsection (b) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(c)  Taxpayer has the same meaning as in Section 182.03 of this chapter, except that "taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under O.R.C. Chapter 5745 "Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer. 
(d)  Tax return or return means the notifications and reports required to be filed pursuant to Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax. 
(e)  Taxable year means the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year. 
(f)  Assessment means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued pursuant to Section 182.03 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.62 - APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT. 
    This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in the City and that has made the election under Section 182.60 of this chapter. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the City shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the City for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(2)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the City to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under Section 182.051 of this chapter; 
(3)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the City to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(b)  (1)  If the apportionment factors described in subsection (a) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in the City, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 
A.  Separate accounting; 
B.  The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 
C.  The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the municipal corporation; 
D.  A modification of one or more of the factors. 
(2)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by Subsection 182.70(a) of this chapter. 
(3)  The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by Subsection 182.70(a) of this chapter. 
(c)  As used in subsection (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(1)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one of the following: 
A.  The employer; 
B.  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
C.  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in subsection (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(2)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer; 
(3)  Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the City as follows: 
(1)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the City only if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following criteria: 
A.  The property is shipped to or delivered within the City from a stock of goods located within the City. 
B.  The property is delivered within the City from a location outside the City, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the City and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(2)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the City to the extent that such services are performed in the City. 
(3)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City. 
(4)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City. 
(5)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the City based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the City. 
(e)  Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the City in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the City based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the City to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(f)  If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation under subsections (c)(12) and (r)(1)D. of Section 182.03 of this chapter by the City or substantially similar provision of the codified ordinances of another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the City. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to the City any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. 
This subsection applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the City under this section. 
(g)  When calculating the ratios described in subsection (a) of this section for the purposes of that subsection or subsection(b) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.63 - INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY. 
(a)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as provided in O.R.C.  4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax Commissioner may furnish the internal revenue service with copies of returns filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
(b)  In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall provide the City Tax Administrator with the following information for every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the City under this chapter for any prior year: 
(1)  The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer identification number; 
(2)  The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal taxable income apportionable to, the City pursuant to Section 182.62 of this chapter; 
(3)  The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized by the taxpayer; 
(4)  Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried forward to a future taxable year; 
(5)  The amount of any credit claimed under O.R.C.  718.94. 
(c)  Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to municipal corporations under O.R.C.  718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to the City a report stating the name and federal identification number of every taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the City and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment. 
(d)  The information described under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the City Tax Administrator under O.R.C.  718.83(D). 
(e)  (1)  The City expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant to O.R.C.  718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in the performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for taxpayers making the election provided in Section 182.60 of this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall review these returns and information, as well as the information received pursuant to subsection (b) and (c) of this section, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the referral. 
(2)  If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by the Tax Administrator under this section, the City reserves its right to pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.64 - FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS. 
(a)  (1)  For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under Section 182.68 of this chapter, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year. 
(2)  If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with Sections 182.61, 182.62, and, if applicable, 182.66 of this chapter onto its annual return. 
(3)  The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of state and in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with the tax return is $10.00 or less, no remittance is required. 
(b)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  A.  The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the Commissioner under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, copies of any relevant documents or other information. 
B.  A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or before January 1, 2019. 
(3)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax. 
(D)    
(1)  A.  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the Commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. 
B.  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request. 
C.  An extension of time to file under subsection (d)(1) of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the tax Commissioner grants an extension of that date. 
(2)  If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with Section 182.061 of this section, the Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(e)  Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person. 
(f)  When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.65 - ELECTRONIC FILING. 
(a)  All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(b)  A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or make the payments by non-electronic means. 
(c)  The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following: 
(1)  The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and make payments by electronic means; 
(2)  The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by electronic means. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.66 - CONSOLIDATED RETURNS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Affiliated group of corporations means an affiliated group as defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  Consolidated federal income tax return means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Consolidated federal taxable income means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. Consolidated federal taxable income does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Incumbent local exchange carrier has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4927.01. 
(5)  Local exchange telephone service has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  5727.01. 
(b)  (1)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under subsection (b)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The Tax Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return election period in effect under subsection (b)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(4)  When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter, a valid election made by the taxpayer under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of Section 182.063 of this chapter is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(5)  When an election made under Section 182.60 of this chapter is terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(c)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the tax Commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(d)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States department of treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(e)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (e)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in Section 182.61 of this chapter , by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that section and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that section. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under Subsection 182.61(b) of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least 80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
A.  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 182.62 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
B.  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 182.62 of this chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than 80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
A.  The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in Section 182.62 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 
B.  The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(f)  Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the computations required under Section 182.62 of this chapter by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(g)  Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts applicable under section 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter or O.R.C. Chapter 5703, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.67 - FAILURE TO PAY TAX. 
    If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter fails to pay any tax as required under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C.  5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under Section 182.70 of this chapter, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.68 - DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Combined tax liability means the total amount of a taxpayer's income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year. 
(2)  Estimated taxes means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable year. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.00. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section, a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Commissioner. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors. 
(c)  Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the amounts prescribed in subsection (c)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made payable to the treasurer of state. 
(1)  The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows: 
A.  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 22 and one-half percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
B.  On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 45 percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
C.  On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, 67 and one-half percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
D.  On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, 90 percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of estimated taxes. 
(3)  A.  Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable year. 
B.  Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section, the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the Treasurer of state. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in division (B) of O.R.C.  718.85. 
(d)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C.  5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in subsection (e) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
A.  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22 and one-half percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
B.  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45 percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
C.  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67 and one-half per cent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
D.  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90 percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently due. 
(3)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with O.R.C.  718.83. 
(e)  An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90 percent of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100 percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for that year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.69 - ADDITIONAL PENALTIES. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty imposed by Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter or O.R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding $25.00 per month or fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this section shall not exceed $150.00. 
(2)  If a person required to file a tax return electronically under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter fails to do so, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the following: 
A.  For each of the first two failures, five percent of the amount required to be reported on the return; 
B.  For the third and any subsequent failure, ten percent of the amount required to be reported on the return. 
(3)  If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to 15 percent of the amount not timely paid. 
(4)  If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or impede the administration of Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, a penalty of up to $500.00 may be imposed. 
(5)  If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000.00 or 100 percent of the tax required to be shown on the return. 
(6)  If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under Section 182.71 of this chapter, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of $1,000.00 or 100 percent of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed under section 182.70 of this chapter without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by subsection (a) of that section. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the return. 
(c)  Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties. 
(d)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations under O.R.C.  718.83. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.70 - ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER. 
(a)  If any taxpayer required to file a return under Section 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the Commissioner's possession. 
The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall extend the three-year time limit in Section 182.71 of this chapter for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment as required by Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in O.R.C.  5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition. 
(b)  Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within 60 days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the taxpayer to the treasurer of state. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under O.R.C.  5703.60. 
(c)  After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the Tax Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin County. 
Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to sales made under the judgment. 
If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C.  5703.47 from the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for collection under O.R.C.  131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C.  5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section. 
(d)  All money collected under this section shall be credited to the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section. 
(e)  If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by subsection (c) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in O.R.C.  5703.37 within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner's consideration of the petition for reassessment. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the treasurer of state does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition. 
If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a decision of the board of tax appeals or any court to which the determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by O.R.C.  182.91, with interest on that amount as provided by that section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.71 - REFUND APPLICATIONS. 
(a)  An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax Commissioner within three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period allowed by subsection 182.70(a) of this chapter. The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(b)  (1)  On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or assessment. If the amount is greater than $10.00 and not less than that claimed, the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the director of budget and management and the treasurer of state for payment from the tax refund fund created in O.R.C.  5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10.00 but less than that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with O.R.C.  5703.70. 
(2)  Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under O.R.C.  718.83. 
(c)  Any portion of a refund determined under subsection (b) of this section that is not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C.  5703.47 from the 91st day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid or credited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.72 - AMENDED RETURNS. 
(a)  If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter and used to determine the tax due under Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the internal revenue service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than 60 days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Commissioner before filing the amended return. 
(b)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a return subject to assessment under Section 182.70 of this chapter for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section, together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return. 
(c)  In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for filing the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in Section 182.71 of this chapter, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in Section 182.71 of this chapter. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.73 - EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS. 
(a)  The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(b)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to Sections 182.60 to 182.75 of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Commissioner determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation. 
(c)  The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(d)  No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.74 - CREDITS. 
(a)  A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the City pursuant to Section 182.064 or 182.065 of this chapter, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section 182.60 of this chapter, against the municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following information to the Tax Commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the 31st day of January of the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit: 
(1)  A copy of the agreement entered into by the City and taxpayer under Section 182.064 or 182.065 of this chapter; 
(2)  A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement entered into between the City and the taxpayer. 
(b)  (1)  Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the City granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit is to be applied. 
(2)  Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered into by the City and taxpayer under Section 182.064 or 182.065 of this chapter, or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.75 - RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, whoever recklessly violates subsection 182.64(a) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. 
(b)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of subsection 182.64(a) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the City from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 ,  1(Exh. A), 2-23-2018) 
182.97 - COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER. 
(a)  This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in Section 182.19. 
(b)  Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Section 182.091 as though the same were continuing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.98 - SAVINGS CLAUSE. 
    If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the legislative authority of the Municipality that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
182.99 - VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, whoever violates Section 182.15 of this chapter, Subsection 182.14(a) of this chapter, or Section 182.051 of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both. 
(b)  Any person who discloses information received from the Internal Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Section 7213(a), 7213A, or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000.00 plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both. 
(c)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of Subsection 182.14(a) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. By way of an illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions: 
(1)  Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter; or 
(2)  Knowingly make any incomplete return; or 
(3)  Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter; or 
(4)  Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from qualifying wages of employees to the Municipality municipal corporation as required by Section 182.051; or 
(5)  Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from employees; or 
(6)  Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; or 
(7)  Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or 
(8)  Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with respect to such person's income or net profits, or in the case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers' income or net profits, such person's employer's income or net profits; or 
(9)  Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or 
(10)  To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or 
(11)  Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax Administrator false information; or 
(12)  Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable year in accordance with this chapter; or 
(13)  Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter. 
(14)  For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of that violation. 
(15)  For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in Section 182.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-49, 10-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 185 - MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX[21] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference- State provisions, O.R.C.  4504.06 

185.01 - LEVY. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to O.R.C.  4504.172, for the purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this section; and to provide additional revenue for the purposes set forth in O.R.C.  4504.06; and to supplement revenue already available for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
185.02 - RATE. 
    Such tax shall be at the rate of $5.00 per motor vehicle on each and every motor vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined in O.R.C.  4503.10, is in the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
185.03 - MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "motor vehicle" means any and all vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicle in O.R.C.  4501.01 and 4505.01. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
185.04 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    The tax imposed by this ordinance shall apply to and be in effect for the registration year commencing January 1, 2006 and shall continue in effect and application during each registration year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
185.05 - PAYMENT. 
    The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio or to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in O.R.C.  4503.10. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
185.06 - PURPOSE. 
    All monies derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall be used by the City for the purposes specified in this chapter and be deposited in the "Municipal Motor Vehicle License Tax Fund." 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 6-21-2005) 
PART THREE - TRAFFIC CODE 
TITLE ONE - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 301 - DEFINITIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Funeral procession defined,  331.24; Drag racing defined,  333.07; Studded tire defined,  339.11; Blind person defined,  371.02 ;Snowmobile and all purpose vehicle defined,  375.01; School zones defined,  333.03(b) 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law 

301.01 - MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this Traffic Code, except as otherwise provided, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
301.02 - AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. 
    Agricultural tractor means every self-propelling vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery but having no provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for agricultural purposes. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(J)) 
301.03 - ALLEY. 
    Alley means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that has been declared an "alley" by Council. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(XX)) 
301.031 - BEACON; HYBRID BEACON. 
(a)  Beacon means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that operate in a flashing mode. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(KKK)) 
(b)  Hybrid beacon means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal indications. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(LLL)) 
301.04 - BICYCLE; MOTORIZED BICYCLE. 
(a)  Bicycle means every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more than 14 inches in diameter. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(G)) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(H)) 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
301.041 - BIKE PATHS. 
    Those paved portions of a street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines or separately paved travelways/paths through parklands, City owned property, and/or easements in favor of the City intended for the use of pedestrians and bicycles. 
(Ord. No. 2002-36, 8-6-2002) 
301.05 - BUS. 
    Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(L)) 
301.06 - BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
    Business district means the territory fronting upon a street or highway, including the street or highway, between successive intersections within municipal corporations where 50 percent or more of the frontage between such successive intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or outside municipal corporations where 50 percent or more of the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(NN)) 
301.07 - COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. 
    Commercial tractor means every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a portion of such other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(I)) 
301.08 - CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. 
    Controlled-access highway means every street or highway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(CC)) 
301.09 - CROSSWALK. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(a)  That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway; 
(b)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface; 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, there shall not be a crosswalk where authorized signs have been placed indicating no crossing. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(LL)) 
301.10 - DRIVER OR OPERATOR. 
    Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(Y)) 
301.11 - EMERGENCY VEHICLE. 
    Emergency vehicle means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county departments or public utility corporations when identified as such as required by law, the Ohio Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(D)) 
301.12 - EXPLOSIVES. 
    Explosives means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of destroying life or limb. 
    Manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantities, of such nature or in such packing, that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of such units, to the injury of life, limb or property by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(T)) 
301.13 - EXPRESSWAY. 
    Expressway means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access with an excess of 50 percent of all crossroads separated in grade. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(ZZ)) 
301.14 - FLAMMABLE LIQUID. 
    Flammable liquid means any liquid that has a flash point of 70 degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(U)) 
301.15 - FREEWAY. 
    Freeway means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with all crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(YY)) 
301.16 - GROSS WEIGHT. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(V)) 
301.161 - HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. 
    Highway maintenance vehicle means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(QQQ)) 
301.162 - HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. 
    Highway traffic signal means a power-operated traffic control device by which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. "Highway traffic signal" does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement markers, warning light, or steady burning electric lamp. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(MMM)) 
301.17 - INTERSECTION. 
    Intersection means: 
(a)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device. 
(b)  If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection. 
(c)  At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection. 
(2)  Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the intersection. 
(3)  Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far side of the crosswalk. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(KK)) 
301.18 - LANED STREET OR HIGHWAY. 
    Laned street or highway means a street or highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(GG)) 
301.181 - MEDIAN. 
    Median means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(NNN)) 
301.19 - MOTORCYCLE. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles known as "motor-driven cycle," "motor scooter," "autocycle," "cab-enclosed motorcycle," or "motorcycle" without regard to weight or brake horsepower. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(C)) 
301.20 - MOTOR VEHICLE. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power, except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work and not designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(B)) 
301.201 - OPERATE. 
    Operate means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(HHH)) 
301.21 - PARK OR PARKING. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
301.22 - PEDESTRIAN. 
    Pedestrian means any natural person afoot. "Pedestrian" includes a personal delivery device as defined in section 4511.513 of the Revised Code unless the context clearly suggests otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2018-50 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(X)) 
301.23 - PERSON. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(W)) 
301.24 - POLE TRAILER. 
    Pole trailer means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(O)) 
301.25 - POLICE OFFICER. 
    Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(Z)) 
301.251 - PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. 
    Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense means any of the following: 
(a)  A violation of O.R.C.  4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22,4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47,4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763,4511.771, 4511.78, or 4511.84; 
(b)  A violation of division (A)(2) of O.R.C.  4511.17, divisions (A) to (D) of O.R.C.  4511.51, or division (A) of O.R.C.  4511.74; 
(c)  A violation of any provision of O.R.C.  4511.01 to 4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated; 
(d)  A violation of O.R.C.  4511.214; 
(e)  A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any section or provision set forth or described in subsection (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(III)) 
301.26 - PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. 
(a)  Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(DD)) 
(b)  Private road open to public travel means a private toll road or road, including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel without access restrictions. "Private road open to public travel" includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within a private gated property where access is restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private grade crossing. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(OOO)) 
301.27 - PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. 
    Public safety vehicle means any of the following: 
(a)  Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a municipal corporation, township or county and private ambulances and transport vehicles bearing license plates issued under O.R.C. 4503.49; 
(b)  Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or the Municipality; 
(c)  Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or directives of that service. The Ohio Fire Marshal shall be designated by the Ohio Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety vehicles described in this subsection (c); 
(d)  Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used by volunteer fire fighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department service when identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be considered a public safety vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a hospital regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital. 
(e)  Vehicles used by the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified in O.R.C. 5503.34. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(E)) 
301.28 - RAILROAD. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed principally on a private right-of-way. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(P)) 
301.29 - RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. 
    Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(SS)) 
301.30 - RAILROAD TRAIN. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, or an electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(Q)) 
301.31 - RESIDENCE DISTRICT. 
    Residence district means the territory, not comprising a business district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(OO)) 
301.32 - RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    Right-of-way means either of the following, as the context requires: 
(a)  The right of a vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it or the individual is moving in preference to another vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into its or the individual's path; 
(b)  A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes. When used in this context, right-of-way includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way limits under the control of the state or local authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(UU)) 
301.321 - ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. 
    Road service vehicle means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state, county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(JJJ)) 
301.33 - ROADWAY. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(EE)) 
301.34 - SAFETY ZONE. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(MM)) 
301.35 - SCHOOL BUS. 
    School bus means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers that is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function; provided "school bus" does not include a bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of the Municipality, or within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediately contiguous to the Municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public Utilities Commission unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function, and "school bus" does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time. "Child day-care center" and "type A family day-care home" have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 5104.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(F), (FFF)) 
301.36 - SEMITRAILER. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(N)) 
301.361 - SHARED-USE PATH. 
    Shared-use path means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separate from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized users. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(PPP)) 
301.37 - SIDEWALK. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(FF)) 
301.38 - STATE ROUTE. 
    State route means every highway that is designated with an official State route number and so marked. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(JJ)) 
301.39 - STOP (WHEN REQUIRED). 
    Stop when required means a complete cessation of movement. 
301.40 - STOPPING OR STANDING. 
(a)  Stop or stopping when prohibited means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. 
(b)  Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise then temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
301.41 - STOP INTERSECTION. 
    Stop intersection means any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop signs are erected. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(BBB)) 
301.42 - STREET OR HIGHWAY; ARTERIAL STREET. 
(a)  Street or highway are synonymous and mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(BB)) 
(b)  Arterial street means any United States or State numbered route, controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(CCC)) 
301.43 - THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY. 
    Through street or highway means every street or highway as provided in Section 313.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(HH)) 
301.44 - THRUWAY. 
    Thruway means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(AAA)) 
301.45 - TRAFFIC. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, trackless trolleys, and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel any highway or private road open to public travel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(TT)) 
301.46 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    Traffic control device means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(QQ)) 
301.47 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. 
    Traffic control signal means any highway traffic signal by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(RR)) 
301.48 - TRAILER. 
    Trailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any such vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(M)) 
301.49 - TRUCK. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(K)) 
301.50 - URBAN DISTRICT. 
    Urban district means the territory contiguous to and including any street or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for distance of a quarter of a mile or more, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic control devices. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(PP)) 
301.51 - VEHICLE. 
    Vehicle means every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except that "vehicle" does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in section 4511.513 of the Revised Code, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017Ord. No. 2017-53,  1, 6, 11-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-50 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(A)) 
301.52 - WHEELCHAIR, MOTORIZED. 
    Motorized wheelchair means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by, a handicapped person and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight miles per hour. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.01(EEE)) 
CHAPTER 303 - ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDING AND PENALTY[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, O.R.C.  737.32, 4513.62 et seq.; Citations for minor misdemeanors, O.R.C.  2935.26 et seq.; Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain violations, O.R.C.  4507.16, 4507.34; State point system suspension, O.R.C.  4507.40; Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, O.R.C.  4511.06; Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, O.R.C.  4549.13; Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, O.R.C.  4549.15 
Cross reference- Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles,  331.20, 333.06 

303.01 - COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING. 
(a)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop. 
Editor's note- Refer to O.R.C. 2921.331 for filing charges under subsection (b) hereof since the jury or judge as trier of fact may determine the violation to be a felony. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply with an order or signal of a police officer. A violation of subsection (a) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as hereinafter provided, a violation of subsection (b) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of subsection (b) is a felony if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds any one of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt: 
(1)  In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony; 
(2)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of subsection (b) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in O.R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense under this section, in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in division (A)(1) of that section. The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set forth in O.R.C. 4510.021. No judge shall suspend the first three years of suspension under a class two suspension of an offender's license, permit or privilege required by this division on any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.331) 
303.02 - TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARD. 
(a)  Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this Traffic Code. Firemen, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or fireman issued pursuant to this section. 
(b)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be assigned. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
303.03 - OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY. 
    A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or highway, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. The officer removing such key shall place notification upon the vehicle detailing his name and badge number, the place where such key may be reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming such key. The key shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.05) 
303.04 - ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED. 
(a)  The provisions of this Traffic Code do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area designated by traffic control devices, but apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(b)  The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as are required by law, and such lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of Sections 331.01 to 331.04, 331.06 to 331.08, 331.31, 333.04, 337.01 and O.R.C. 4511.66 and 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(c)  (1)  This section does not exempt a driver of as highway maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Sections 331.01 to 331.04, 331.06 to 331.08, 331.31, 333.04, 337.01 or O.R.C.  4511.66 or 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(2)  This section does not exempt the driver of a vehicle that is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of O.R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09. 
(d)  As used in this section, "engaged in the performance of official duties" includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.04) 
303.041 - EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER'S VEHICLES EXEMPT. 
(a)  Ohio Revised Code Sections 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69 and all sections of this Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to the sections listed above, do not apply to the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.041) 
(b)  Ohio Revised Code Sections 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and 4511.66, and all sections of this Traffic Code or other municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to the sections listed above, do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle in accordance with O.R.C. 4513.171. This section does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.042) 
303.05 - APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY. 
    Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of such sections which by their nature are inapplicable. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.05) 
303.06 - FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS. 
(a)  No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall: 
(1)  As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance; 
(2)  Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals; a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for bicycle use; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor driven cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works or official duties. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.051) 
303.07 - APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES. 
    The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this Municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and public safety vehicles. 
303.08 - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION. 
(a)  Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations. 
(2)  When any vehicle or "abandoned junk motor vehicle" as defined in O.R.C.  4513.63 is left on private property for more than 48 consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in such place. Prior to disposal of an "abandoned junk motor vehicle" as defined in O.R.C.  4513.63, it shall be photographed by a law enforcement officer. 
(3)  When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of the owner and is located upon either public or private property. 
(4)  When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to display the current lawfully required plates and is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(5)  When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission of a felony and is located upon either public or private property. 
(6)  When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property, and is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(7)  When any vehicle is left unattended either on public or private property due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator, or due to the abandonment thereof by the operator during or immediately after pursuit by a law enforcement officer. 
(8)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to stop in case of an accident or collision and is located either on public or private property. 
(9)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving without a lawful license or while his license has been suspended or revoked and is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(10)  When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required, and is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(b)  Any vehicle removed under authority of subsection (a)(2) hereof shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under O.R.C. 4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall be ordered into storage and the Municipal police shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall appear at the police offices to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges. 
(c)  No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the owner or operator, shall constitute prima-facie evidence that it was so removed by the owner or operator. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
303.081 - IMPOUNDING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL OR AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. 
(a)  (1)  The Chief of Police upon complaint of any person adversely affected may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in O.R.C. 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property. The Chief of Police, upon complaint of the owner of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this section, the Chief of Police may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall designate a storage facility. 
(2)  A towing service towing a motor vehicle under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that subsection. The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the private property. 
(3)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this subsection may recover the vehicle only in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  As used in this section "private residential property" means private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. "Private residential property" does not include any private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by two or more persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. 
(b)  If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section arrives after the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the motor vehicle under subsection (d)(1) of this section in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle. Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable. 
(c)  (1)  The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the Chief orders into storage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle's license number, make, model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of the removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The Chief of Police shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location. 
(2)  Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the Police Chief's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location. 
(d)  (1)  The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following: 
A.  Payment of the following fees: 
1.  Not more than $90.00 for the removal of the motor vehicle. However, if the motor vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds, and is a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than $150.00 for the removal. 
2.  Not more than $12.00 per 24-hour period for the storage of the motor vehicle. However, if the motor vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than $20.00 per 24-hour period for storage. 
B.  Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. 
(2)  Upon presentation of proof of ownership, as required under subsection (d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage under subsection (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. However, the owner may not retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the Chief of Police, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal investigation. For purposes of subsection (d)(2) of this section, "personal items" do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle. 
(3)  If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the procedures established by O.R.C. 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply. 
(e)  (1)  No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other than in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of this section or O.R.C. 4513.61 to 4513.65. 
(2)  No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  This section does not apply to any private residential or private agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with Section 303.082. 
(g)  The owner of any towing service or storage facility that violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.60) 
303.082 - PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES. 
(a)  The owner of private property may establish a private tow-away zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The owner posts on the owner's property a sign, that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information: 
A.  A statement that the property is a tow-away zone; 
B.  A description of persons authorized to park on the property. If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in the private tow-away zone, the owner shall include on the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is located, or the name of the business that is located on the property designated as a private tow-away zone. 
C.  If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times, the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced; 
D.  The telephone number and the address of the place from which a towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night; 
E.  A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in division (B) of O.R.C. 4505.101. 
Any owner of property that has been established as a private tow-away zone under O.R.C. 4513.60 or Section 303.081 et seq. of this Traffic Code as that section existed prior to the effective date of this section who does not have a contract with a towing service for the removal of vehicles from the property may retain existing private tow-away zone signs that comply with that section for up to six months after the effective date of this section. At any time, in order to comply with the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section, such a property owner may modify the existing sign by affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the sign. 
(2)  A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this section is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with all of the following: 
A.  It is located within 20 linear miles of the location of the private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a place of storage within 20 linear miles. 
B.  It is well-lighted. 
C.  It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which the private tow-away zone is located. 
(b)  (1)  If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, without the consent of the owner of the property or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this section. The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established under subsection (g) of this section, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in O.R.C. 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this section, subject to subsection (c) of this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck operators to be licensed, no owner of private property located within the municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle pursuant to subsection (b) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed tow truck operator. 
(c)  If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under authority of subsection (b) of this section, arrives after the vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to the actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle established under subsection (g) of this section, in order to obtain release of the vehicle. Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private tow-away zone without the consent of the owner or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation. 
(d)  (1)  Prior to towing a vehicle under subsection (b) of this section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under subsection (a) of this section. 
The towing service shall record the time and date of the photographs taken under this section. The towing service shall retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier. 
(2)  A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under subsection (b) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone. 
(e)  (1)  If an owner of private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with subsection (a) of this section causes the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under subsection (b) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the vehicle, shall provide notice to the Police Department concerning all of the following: 
A.  The vehicle's license number, make, model and color; 
B.  The location from which the vehicle was removed; 
C.  The date and time the vehicle was removed; 
D.  The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may be recovered; 
E.  The address of the place from which the vehicle may be recovered. 
(2)  The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private property in the Chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the Chief has received notice under this section. The record shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner, operator or lienholder of the vehicle, and requests information pertaining to the vehicle. 
(f)  (1)  When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance with this section, the owner of the towing service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall immediately cause a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle. Subject to subsection (f)(4) of this section, the owner of the towing service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known lienholder as follows: 
A.  Within five business days of removal of the vehicle from the private tow-away zone, if the vehicle has not yet been recovered, to the owner's and lienholder's last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt; 
B.  If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first notice is sent, in the manner authorized in subsection (f)(1)A. of this section; 
C.  If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days after the first notice is sent, in the manner authorized in subsection (f)(1)A. of this section. 
(2)  Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to subsection (f)(1) of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not possible, the owner of a towing service or storage facility, if authorized under subsection (B) of O.R.C. 4505.101, may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to the motor vehicle as provided in that section. 
(3)  A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible, shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to the motor vehicle under division (B) of O.R.C. 4505.101. 
(4)  With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under O.R.C. 4505.101, the towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice required under subsection (f)(1)A. of this section. 
(g)  (1)  The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under subsection (b) of this section may reclaim it upon all of the following: 
A.  Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle or a lease agreement; 
B.  Payment of the following fees: 
1.  Not more than $90.00 for the removal of the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than $150.00 for the removal. 
2.  Not more than $12.00 per 24-hour period for the storage of the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus, or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than $20.00 per 24-hour period for storage. 
3.  If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as described in subsection (f) of this section, a processing fee of $25.00. 
(2)  A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle that is removed under authority of subsection (b) of this section shall show the vehicle owner, operator or lienholder who contests the removal of the vehicle all photographs taken under subsection (d) of this section. Upon request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide copies of all photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper, electronic, or otherwise. 
(3)  Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed under authority of subsection (b) of this section may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. For purposes of subsection (g)(3) of this section, "personal items" do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle. 
(h)  No towing service or storage facility shall remove, or cause the removal of any vehicle from private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this section, store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this section, or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of this section. 
(i)  This section does not affect or limit the operation of O.R.C. 4513.60 or O.R.C. 4513.61 to 4613.65 as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under subsection (a) of this section. 
(j)  The owner of any towing service or storage facility or property owner that violates subsection (h) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.601) 
303.083 - RELEASE OF VEHICLE; RECORDS; CHARGES. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former Section 303.083 as amended are now codified in Section 303.081. 
303.09 - LEAVING JUNK AND OTHER VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMISSION OR NOTIFICATION. 
(a)  No person shall willfully leave any vehicle or an "abandoned junk motor vehicle" as defined in O.R.C. 4513.63 on private property for more than 72 consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property or on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving the vehicle in such place. 
For purposes of this section, the fact that a vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima-facie evidence of abandonment. Nothing contained in this section shall invalidate the provisions of other ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the Municipality. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the Municipality in disposing of an abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the violation, less any money accruing to the Municipality from this disposal of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.64) 
303.10 - LEAVING JUNK VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITH PERMISSION OF OWNER. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "junk motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of O.R.C. 4513.63(B) to (E) that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than 72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under authority of O.R.C. 4737.05 to 4737.12; or regulated under authority of the Municipality; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation, or if the motor vehicle is a collector's vehicle. 
Persons may store or keep by unrestricted method any collector's vehicle as defined in O.R.C. 4501.01(F) on private property with the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; except that such person having such permission shall conceal, by means of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable obstruction, any unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open. 
Council, the Chief of Police or the Municipal Zoning Authority, may send notice by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure or shall be removed from the property. 
No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima-facie evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice. Each subsequent period of 30 days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.65) 
303.11 - PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION TO POLICE OFFICER. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a false name, social security number or date of birth to a law enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or complaint. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.361) 
303.99 - GENERAL TRAFFIC CODE PENALTIES. 
(a)  General Misdemeanor Classifications. Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
(b)  Penalties. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this Traffic Code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as provided in this section. 
Classification of 
Misdemeanor Maximum Term of 
Imprisonment Maximum Fine First degree 180 days $1,000.00 Second degree 90 days 750.00 Third degree 60 days 500.00 Fourth degree 30 days 250.00 Minor No imprisonment 150.00  
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2929.24; 2929.28) 
CHAPTER 305 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional history for similar State law 
Cross reference- Traffic control devices defined,  301.46; Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs,  313.02 
State Law reference- Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway, O.R.C.  4511.011; Uniform system of traffic control devices, O.R.C.  4511.09, 4511.11(D); Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, OR.C.  4511.10, 4511.11; Alteration of prima-facie speed limits, O.R.C.  4511.21, 4511.22(A), 4511.23; Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings, O.R.C.  4511.61; Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, O.R.C.  4511.65 

305.01 - AUTHORITY TO REGULATE LOCAL TRAFFIC. 
    The provisions of the State Traffic Code as contained in O.R.C. Chapters 4511 and 4513 do not prevent the Municipality from enacting local traffic regulations covering the following activities with respect to the streets and highways under local jurisdiction and within the reasonable exercise of the police power by the Municipality: 
(a)  Regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles; 
(b)  Regulating traffic by means of police officers or traffic control devices; 
(c)  Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on streets or highways; 
(d)  Designating particular streets as one-way streets and requiring that all vehicles on the one-way streets be moved in one specific direction; 
(e)  Regulating the speed of vehicles in public parks; 
(f)  Designating any street or highway as a through street or highway and requiring that all vehicles stop before entering or crossing a through street or highway, or designating any intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection; 
(g)  Regulating or prohibiting vehicles from passing to the left of safety zones; 
(h)  Regulating the operation of bicycles and requiring the registration and licensing of bicycles, including the requirements of a registration fee. 
(i)  Regulating the use of certain streets by vehicles. 
    No ordinance or regulation enacted under subsections (d), (e), (f), (g) or (i) of this section shall be effective until signs giving notice of the local traffic regulations are posted upon or at the entrance to the street or highway or part of the street or highway affected, as may be most appropriate. 
    Every ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted under subsection (a) hereof shall be enforced in compliance with Section 305.05. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.07) 
305.02 - CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL. 
    All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as set forth in O.R.C. 4511.09. 
305.03 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 305.03 was repealed by Ordinance 2005-52, passed October 4, 2005. 
305.04 - VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO MISDEMEANOR CLASSIFICATION. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection with this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be classified as provided in Section 303.99. 
305.05 - OWNER MAY ESTABLISH NONLIABILITY FOR LOCAL TRAFFIC OFFENSES BY PROOF OF LEASE OF VEHICLE. 
(a)  The owner of a vehicle shall be entitled to establish nonliability for prosecution for violation of an ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted under Section 305.01(a) by proving the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of a person other than the owner at the time of the violation pursuant to a written lease agreement providing that except for such agreement, no other business relationship with respect to the vehicle in question exists between the operator and owner. 
(b)  Proof that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of a person other than the owner shall be established by sending a copy of such written lease agreement to the prosecuting authority within 30 days from the date of receipt by the owner of the notice of violation. The furnishing of a copy of a written lease agreement shall be prima-facie evidence that a vehicle was in the care, custody or control of a person other than the owner. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.071) 
TITLE THREE - STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
CHAPTER 311 - STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional history for similar State law 
Cross reference- Dropping, sifting and leaking loads,  339.08 
State Law reference- Power to regulate processions or assemblages, O.R.C.  4511.07(C) 

311.01 - PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET. 
(a)  No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a street, highway or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such street, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any noxious, destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same. 
(c)  Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(d)  No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a street without proper authority. 
(e)  No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof. 
(f)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.74) 
311.02 - PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES. 
(a)  No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or participate in any parade, assemblage or procession other than a funeral procession upon any street or highway, or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from the Police Chief. 
Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade, procession or assemblage. 
The permit may be refused or cancelled if: 
(1)  The time, place, size or conduct of the parade including the assembly areas and route of march would unreasonably interfere with the public convenience and safe use of the streets and highways. 
(2)  The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the Municipality. 
(3)  The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably interfere with the movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment or ambulance service to other areas of the Municipality. 
(4)  The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued. 
(5)  The information contained in the application is found to be false, misleading or incomplete in any material detail. 
(6)  An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper conduct of the parade. 
The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe reasonable conditions, including the hours, the place of assembly and of dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions thereof which may be used or occupied. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
311.03 - TOY VEHICLES ON STREETS. 
(a)  No person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any sled, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play streets. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
CHAPTER 313 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; Designation of through streets or stop intersections, O.R.C.  4511.07(F), 4511.65; Uniform system of traffic control devices, O.R.C.  4511.09, 4511.11(D); Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, O.R.C.  4511.10, 4511.11 
Cross reference- Traffic control devices defined,  301.46 

313.01 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. 
No provisions of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.12) 
313.02 - THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS. 
(a)  All State routes are hereby designated as through streets or highways, provided that stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals shall be erected at all intersections with such through streets or highways, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where two or more State routes that are through streets or highways intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Ohio Department of Transportation, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
Whenever the Ohio Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or removes a stop sign under this paragraph, he shall give notice, in writing, of that proposed action to the Municipality at least 30 days before installing or removing the stop sign. 
(b)  Other streets or highways or portions thereof, are hereby designated through streets or highways, if they are within the Municipality, if they have a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of such street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have "stop" or "yield" signs or traffic control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of such street or highway or portion thereof, shall be a municipal corporation line, the physical terminus of the street or highway or any point on such street or highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided that in residence districts the Municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. Where two or more streets or highways designated under this subsection (b) intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Ohio Department of Transportation or by Council or the authorized local authority, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(c)  Stop signs need not be erected at intersections so constructed as to permit traffic to safely enter a through street or highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through street or highway. 
(d)  Council or the authorized local authority may designate additional through streets or highways and shall erect stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals at all streets and highways intersecting such through streets or highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield intersection and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to such intersection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.65) 
313.03 - TRAFFIC SIGNAL INDICATIONS. 
    Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles, and pedestrians shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Steady Green Signal Indication: 
(1)  A.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left, or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
1.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
2.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
B.  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
A.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk. 
B.  Other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(3)  A.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication, as provided in Section 313.05, pedestrians facing a circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed. 
B.  Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway. 
(b)  Steady Yellow Signal Indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed. 
(3)  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in Section 313.05 or other traffic control device, shall not start to cross the roadway. 
(c)  Steady Red Signal Indication: 
(1)  A.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, before then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
B.  Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  A.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is displayed. 
B.  When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow, and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(3)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in Section 313.05 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation on State highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection. 
(d)  Flashing Green Signal Indication. A flashing green signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used. 
(e)  Flashing Yellow Signal Indication: 
(1)  A.  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
1.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
2.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
B.  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(2)  A.  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following: 
1.  Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; 
2.  Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection. 
B.  In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(3)  Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed. 
(4)  When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. 
(f)  Flashing Red Signal Indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed. 
(3)  When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point. 
(g)  General Application: In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(h)  Exception. This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by O.R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.13) 
313.04 - LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL INDICATIONS. 
(a)  The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows: 
(1)  A steady downward green arrow: A road user is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located. 
(2)  A steady yellow "X": A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being made to a steady red "X" signal indication. 
(3)  A steady white two-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted. 
(4)  A steady white one-way left-turn arrow: A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel. 
(5)  A steady red "X": A road user is not permitted to use the lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.131) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.99) 
313.05 - SPECIAL PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS. 
(a)  Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "don't walk," or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in place, such signals shall indicate the following instructions: 
(1)  A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes "walk," means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person signal indication is first shown. 
(2)  A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes "don't walk," means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area. 
(3)  A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication. 
(4)  Nothing int his section shall be construed to invalidate the continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word "wait" if those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985. 
(5)  A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.14) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.99) 
313.06 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former O.R.C.  4511.15 from which Section 313.06 was derived was repealed by House Bill 349, effective April 20, 2012. 
313.07 - UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any street any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic control devices by the owner of real property in accordance with O.R.C. 4511.211 and 4511.432. 
Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public nuisance, and the Police Chief is authorized to remove it or cause it to be removed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.16) 
313.08 - ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  No person without lawful authority, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any traffic control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of the device, sign or signal; 
(2)  Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an undried condition and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices intended to protect it; 
(3)  Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a manhole cover. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.17) 
313.09 - DRIVER'S DUTIES UPON APPROACHING AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNAL. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley who approaches an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows, exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle: 
(1)  Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop before entering the intersection; 
(2)  Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys in the intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys will constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways; 
(3)  Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.132) 
313.10 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE, POSSESSION OR SALE. 
(a)  As used in this section, "traffic control device" means any sign, traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in accordance with the manual adopted under O.R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and highways, but does not mean any pavement marking. 
(b)  No individual shall buy or otherwise possess or sell, a traffic control device, except when one of the following applies: 
(1)  In the course of the individual's employment by the state or a local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing, erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device; 
(2)  In the course of the individual's employment by any manufacturer of traffic control devices other than a state or local authority; 
(3)  For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a traffic control device to state or local officials; 
(4)  When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit for use; 
(5)  The traffic control device has been properly purchased from a manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by the manufacturer. 
(c)  This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of O.R.C. 2913.02 or a municipal ordinance relating to theft, or for receiving stolen property in violation of O.R.C. 2913.51 or a municipal ordinance relating to receiving stolen property. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.18) 
313.11 - PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES PROHIBITED. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device. 
(2)  No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect the operation of a traffic control signal. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following persons and subsection (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the following persons when responding to an emergency call: 
(1)  A peace officer, as defined in O.R.C. 109.71(A)(11), (12), (14) or (19); 
(2)  A state highway patrol trooper; 
(3)  A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in O.R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (3) or (4). 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  As used in this section, "portable signal preemption device" means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic control signal to green out of sequence. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.031) 
TITLE FIVE - VEHICLES 
CHAPTER 331 - OPERATION GENERALLY[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Obedience to traffic control devices,  313.01; Operation of bicycles and motorcycles,  373.01 et seq. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; School bus operation, OAC Ch. 4501-3 

331.01 - DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic; 
(5)  When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control device. 
(b)  (1)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following circumstances: 
A.  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
B.  When preparing for a left turn; 
C.  When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route. 
(2)  Nothing in subsection (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow overtaking by a faster vehicle. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) hereof. 
This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.25) 
331.02 - PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS. 
(a)  Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is reasonably possible. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.26) 
331.03 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES. 
(a)  The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles or trackless trolleys proceeding in the same direction: 
(1)  The operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley overtaking another vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section, signal to the vehicle or trackless trolley to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle or trackless trolley. When a motor vehicle or trackless trolley overtakes and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a safe passing distance. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  The operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley overtaking and passing another vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in Section 331.31, a limited access highway as defined in O.R.C.  5511.02, or a highway with four or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly to the vehicle or trackless trolley being overtaken and passed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.27) 
331.04 - OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.28) 
331.05 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made, without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for traffic approaching from the opposite direction before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.29) 
331.06 - ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel; 
(3)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(b)  This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side or under the conditions described in Section 331.01(a)(2). 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.30) 
331.07 - HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES. 
(a)  Hazardous zones, commonly called "no passing zones," shall consist of an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed parallel to the normal center line or marked lane line. When the auxiliary yellow line appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel and to the right of the normal center line or marked lane line, no driver shall drive across the auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. When auxiliary yellow lines appear on both sides of the normal center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding in either direction shall not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. No driver shall, at any other time, drive across the yellow auxiliary line when it appears in the driver's lane of travel, except to make a lawfully permitted left-hand turn under the rules governing such movement. No passing signs may also be erected facing traffic to indicate the beginning and end of each no passing zone. 
When appropriate signs or markings indicating hazardous or no passing zones are in place and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distance set out in Section 331.06. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the speed limit applicable to that location. 
(2)  The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit. 
(3)  There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of Section 331.05, considering the speed of the slower vehicle. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.31) 
331.08 - DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC. 
(a)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or wherever traffic is lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following rules apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from such lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs. 
(4)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.33) 
331.09 - FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY. 
(a)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph does not prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks. 
Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, shall maintain a sufficient space between such vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.34) 
331.10 - TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to the traffic moving in that lane. 
(4)  Markers, buttons or signs may be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when such markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.36) 
331.11 - TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof. 
(3)  Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, private road, driveway or building. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
331.12 - "U" TURNS RESTRICTED. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 313.03 and subsection (b) hereof, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction. 
(b)  The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction. This subsection applies only when the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This subsection does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.37) 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety to other users of the street and without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.37) 
331.13 - STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES. 
(a)  No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on the street or highway. 
No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except: in a rest area; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.38) 
331.14 - SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway unless and until such person has exercised due care to ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle. 
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give a signal. 
Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic intention to turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles. 
The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.39) 
331.15 - HAND AND ARM SIGNALS. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, all signals required by this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(b)  As an alternative to subsection (a)(2) hereof, a person operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.40) 
331.16 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (a) hereof, is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code and O.R.C. Chapter 4511. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.41) 
(c)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, when two vehicles approach or enter a junction of two or more alleys from different directions at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.41) 
331.17 - RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, whenever the approaching vehicle is within the intersection or so close to the intersection, alley, private road or driveway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.42) 
331.18 - OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT YIELD SIGNS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima-facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.43(B)) 
331.19 - OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP SIGNS. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.43(A)) 
331.20 - EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS. 
(a)  The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.03) 
331.21 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER'S VEHICLE. 
(a)  (1)  Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(2)  Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle, as stated in subsection (a)(1) of this section, no operator of any streetcar or trackless trolley shall fail to immediately stop the streetcar or trackless trolley clear of any intersection and keep it in that position until the public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(c)  This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is operated in accordance with O.R.C.  4513.171. As used in this section, "coroner's vehicle" means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating, or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell capable of giving an audible signal. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this section or in O.R.C.  4511.454, whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.45) 
331.22 - DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; DUTY TO YIELD. 
(a)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley or from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.44) 
331.23 - DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT SIDEWALK. 
(a)  Subject to compliance with any traffic control device, the driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.431) 
331.24 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION. 
(a)  As used in this section "funeral procession" means two or more vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(b)  Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Section 331.21 or when directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection notwithstanding any traffic control devices or right-of-way provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian. 
(c)  No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.451) 
331.25 - DRIVER'S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.70(A),(B),(D)) 
331.26 - DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR. 
(a)  No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close such street or highway. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.71) 
331.27 - FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.72) 
331.28 - DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE. 
(a)  No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Chief or fire official in command, be driven over any unprotected fire hose that is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.73) 
331.29 - DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.60) 
331.30 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS. 
(a)  Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the rotary traffic island. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.32) 
331.31 - DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS. 
(a)  Whenever any street has been divided into two roadways by an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or median section, except through an opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This section does not prohibit the occupancy of such dividing space, barrier or median section for the purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an order of a police officer. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.35) 
331.32 - ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
331.33 - OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION, CROSSWALK OR GRADE CROSSING. 
(a)  No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.712) 
331.34 - FAILURE TO CONTROL; WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(c)  No person shall operate a vehicle without giving his full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
331.35 - OCCUPYING A MOVING TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME. 
(a)  No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.701) 
331.36 - SQUEALING TIRES, "PEELING," CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES. 
(a)  No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly called "peeling." 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
331.37 - DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, BIKE PATHS, STREET LAWNS, OR OTHER AREAS. 
(a)  No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle, other than a bicycle, including motorized scooters but excluding any vehicle designed to assist the handicapped, upon a sidewalk, sidewalk areas, or bike paths except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(b)  No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle, other than a bicycle including motorized scooters but excluding any vehicle designed to assist the handicapped, on a street lawn area or curb of a street except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, City-authorized vehicles may operate on bikepaths in the performance of City duties. 
(Ord. No. 2002-36, 8-6-2002) 
331.38 - STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; DISCHARGING CHILDREN. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to proceed. 
It is no defense to a charge under this subsection (a) hereof that the school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign as required by subsection (b) hereof. 
(b)  Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of O.R.C. 4511.771, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are boarding or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board. 
(c)  Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with subsection (a) hereof. 
(d)  School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway. 
(e)  No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a place of safety on the child or person's residence side of the road. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Head start agency has the same meaning as in O.R.C. 3301.32. 
(2)  School bus, as used in relation to children who attend a program offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and displays the markings described in O.R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of O.R.C. 4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any time. "School bus" does not include a van owned and operated by a head start agency, irrespective of its color, lights, or markings. 
(g)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section may be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of subsection (a) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge. 
(2)  In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (a)(7) of O.R.C. 4510.02. When a license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.75) 
331.39 - DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING. 
(a)  (1)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, if any of the following circumstances exist at the crossing: 
A.  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train. 
B.  A crossing gate is lowered. 
C.  A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train. 
D.  There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
E.  An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing. 
F.  There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate the crossing. 
(2)  A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described in subsections (a)(1)A.-F. of this section exist at the crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.62) 
331.40 - STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING. 
(a)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, the operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to be placarded under 49 CFR Parts 100-185, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and, while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(2)  This section does not apply at grade crossings when the Ohio Public Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in this subsection. 
A.  Any local authority may file an application with the Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing. Upon receipt of such a request, the Commission shall authorize a limited period for the filing of comments by any party regarding the application and then shall conduct a public hearing in the community seeking the exempt crossing designation. The Commission shall provide appropriate prior public notice of the comment period and the public hearing. By registered mail, the Commission shall notify each railroad operating over the crossing of the comment period. 
B.  After considering any comments or other information received, the Commission may approve or reject the application. By order, the Commission may establish conditions for the exempt crossing designation, including compliance with division (b) of 49 C.F.R. Part 392.10, when applicable. An exempt crossing designation becomes effective only when appropriate signs giving notice of the exempt designation are erected at the crossing as ordered by the Commission and any other conditions ordered by the Commission are satisfied. 
C.  By order, the Commission may rescind any exempt crossing designation made under this section if the Commission finds that a condition at the exempt crossing has changed to such an extent that the continuation of the exempt crossing designation compromises public safety. The Commission may conduct a public hearing to investigate and determine whether to rescind the exempt crossing designation. If the Commission rescinds the designation, it shall order the removal of any exempt crossing signs and may make any other necessary order. 
(3)  As used in this section: 
A.  "School vehicle" means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school. 
B.  "Bus" means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more passengers, including the driver. 
C.  "Exempt crossing" means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under subsection (a)(2) hereof at which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (a)(4), whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of subsection (a) hereof or O.R.C. 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those sections, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.63) 
(b)  (1)  When authorized stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50 but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this subsection (b)(1) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.61(D), (E)) 
331.41 - SHORTCUTTING; AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property marked with signs "No Through Traffic" or words of similar import for the purpose of passing from one roadway to another. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle across public or private property for the purpose of avoiding compliance with a traffic control device. 
(c)  It shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section for the operator of a vehicle to cross public or private property as provided herein without using the service of such property, stopping the engine or both. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
331.42 - LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements. 
(b)  No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements. 
(c)  As used in this section, "litter" means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.82) 
331.43 - WEARING EARPLUGS OR EARPHONES PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, "earphones" means any headset, radio, tape player or other similar device that provides the listener with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. "Earphones" does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into protective headgear. 
(b)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Any person wearing a hearing aid; 
(2)  Law enforcement personnel while on duty; 
(3)  Fire personnel and emergency medical service personnel while on duty; 
(4)  Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the maintenance or repair of any street or highway; or 
(5)  Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.84) 
331.44 - VEHICULAR OPERATION ON STREET CLOSED DUE TO RISE IN WATER LEVEL. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.00. 
(b)  A person who is issued a citation for a violation of subsection (a) hereof is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in court, but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under Section 501.99 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any such rescurer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000.00. If more than one rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under division (B) of O.R.C. 2929.28, a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in O.R.C. 2929.28. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical service organization, firefighting agency and private fire company have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 9.60. 
(2)  Rescuer means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting service, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.714) 
331.45 - PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICES. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Eligible entity" means a corporation, partnership, association, firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business. 
(2)  "Personal delivery device" means an electrically powered device to which all of the following apply: 
A.  The device is intended primarily to transport property on sidewalks and crosswalks. 
B.  The device weighs less than ninety pounds excluding any property being carried in the device. 
C.  The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour. 
D.  The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or monitoring by a person. 
(3)  "Personal delivery device operator" means an agent of an eligible entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. "Personal delivery device operator" does not include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. "Personal delivery device operator" also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery device for a delivery or other service. 
(b)  An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the personal delivery device is operated. 
(2)  A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device. 
(3)  The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes general liability coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars for damages arising from the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any agent of the eligible entity. 
(4)  The device is equipped with all of the following: 
A.  A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique identification number; 
B.  A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to come to a controlled stop; 
C.  If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. 
(c)  No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery device to do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and signals; 
(2)  Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic; 
(3)  Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued by the public utilities commission; 
(4)  Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or highway within a crosswalk. 
(d)  A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks and crosswalks. 
(e)  (1)  No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following: 
A.  Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal delivery device operator; and 
B.  Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions (c)(1) to (4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-50 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.513) 
331.46 - PUBLIC SAFETY HIGHWAY PATROL CUSTODIAL FUND. 
    There is hereby created the public safety highway patrol custodial fund, which shall be in the custody of the treasurer of state, but shall not be part of the state treasury. Except as otherwise provided in section 5502.1321 of the Revised Code, all money seized during investigations or other enforcement activities of the highway patrol shall be deposited into the fund or otherwise safeguarded as provided in Chapter 2981. of the Revised Code. The director of public safety shall transfer money upon resolution of all legal proceedings in accordance with Chapter 2981. of the Revised Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-50 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4501.07) 
CHAPTER 333 - OVI; WILLFUL MISCONDUCT; SPEED[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Failure to control vehicle,  331.34; Walking on highway while under the influence,  371.09 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; Drug of abuse defined, O.R.C.  3719.011(A); Alcohol defined, O.R.C.  4301.01(B)(1); Alteration of prima-facie speed limits, O.R.C.  4511.21, 4511.22(B), 4511.23 

333.01 - DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE. 
(a)  (1)  Operation Generally. No person shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply: 
A.  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
B.  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one percent or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one percent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
C.  The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths of one percent or more but less than two hundred four-thousandths of one percent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
D.  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one gram or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's breath. 
E.  The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one gram or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person's urine. 
F.  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one percent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
G.  The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths of one percent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
H.  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's breath. 
I.  The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight- thousandths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per 150 milliliters of the person's urine. 
J.  Except as provided in subsection (m) of this section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following: 
1.  The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
2.  The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
3.  The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
4.  The person has a concentration of heroin in the person's urine of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
5.  The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
6.  The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
7.  The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
8.  Either of the following applies: 
a.  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
b.  As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
9.  The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
10.  The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
11.  The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to O.R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person's urine, in a person's whole blood, or in a person's blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this Municipality, the rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person's urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(2)  No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in subsection (a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of O.R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following: 
A.  Operate any vehicle within this Municipality while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them; 
B.  Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as described in subsection (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under O.R.C. 4511.191, and being advised by the officer in accordance with O.R.C. 4511.192 of the consequences of the person's refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests. 
(b)  Operation After Under-Age Consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one percent but less than eight-hundredths of one percent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood. 
(2)  The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one percent but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one percent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(3)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one gram but less than eight-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath. 
(4)  The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-thousandths of one gram but less than eleven-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine. 
(c)  One Conviction Limitation. In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or (a)(2) and a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these subsections. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.99) 
(d)  Physical Control. 
(1)  As used in this subsection, "physical control" means being in the driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle's ignition key or other ignition device. 
(2)  A.  No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply: 
1.  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
2.  The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in subsection (a)(1)B., C., D. or E. hereof. 
3.  Except as provided in subsection (d)(3) of this section, the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in subsection (a)(1)J. hereof. 
B.  No person under 21 years of age shall be in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or while the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in subsection (b)(1) to (4) hereof. 
(3)  Subsection (d)(2)A.3. of this section does not apply to a person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in subsection (a)(1)J. hereof, if both of the following apply: 
A.  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
B.  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(e)  Evidence; Tests. 
(1)  A.  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of (a)(1)A. of this section or for any equivalent offense, that is vehicle-related the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in O.R.C. 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. 
B.  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this subsection regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in O.R.C. 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that section. 
The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this section when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer under O.R.C. 4511.191, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this subsection may refuse to withdraw blood under this subsection, if in that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. 
The bodily substance withdrawn under subsection (e)(1)B. hereof shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to O.R.C. 3701.143. 
C.  As used in subsection (e)(1)B. of this section, "emergency medical technician-intermediate" and "emergency medical technician-paramedic" have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 4765.01. 
(2)  In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for violation of subsection (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in subsections (a)(1)B., C., D. and E. of this section, or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of subsection (a)(1)J. of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This subsection does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to that subsection. 
(3)  Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. 
If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to subsection (e)(1)B. hereof, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of O.R.C. 4511.191, the arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. If the person was under arrest other than described in division (A)(5) of O.R.C. 4511.191, the form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under O.R.C. 4511.192, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person's expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  A.  As used in subsections (e)(4)B. and C. of this section, "national highway traffic safety administration" means the National Traffic Highway Safety Administration established as an administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C.A. 105. 
B.  In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (a), (b) or (d) of this section, of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or person in physical control of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply: 
1.  The officer may testify concerning the results of the field sobriety test so administered. 
2.  The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding. 
3.  If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under subsection (e)(4)B.1. or 2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate. 
C.  Subsection (e)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that subsection, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by subsection (e)(4)B. of this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.19; 4511.194) 
(f)  Forensic Laboratory Reports. 
(1)  Subject to subsection (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of subsection (a)(1)B., C., D., E., F., G., H., I., or J. or (b)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those subsections, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this subsection that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in this subsection shall be admitted as prima- facie evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of the following: 
A.  The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the analysis; 
B.  Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found; 
C.  A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties; 
D.  An outline of the analyst's or test performer's education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the Department of Health. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission of evidence, a report of the type described in subsection (f)(1) of this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant. 
(3)  A report of the type described in subsection (f)(1) of this section shall not be prima-facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of justice. 
(g)  Immunity From Liability For Withdrawing Blood. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or O.R.C. 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or O.R.C. 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this subsection also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity provided in this subsection is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engaged in willful or wanton misconduct. 
As used in this subsection, "emergency medical technician-intermediate" and "emergency medical technician-paramedic" have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 4765.01. 
(h)  General OVI Penalty. 
(1)  Whoever violates any provision of subsections (a)(1)A-I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever violates subsection (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for either offense under O.R.C. Chapter 2929, and this Traffic Code, except as otherwise authorized or required by subsections (h)(1)A-E. of this section: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (h)(1)B., C., D. or E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
1.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsections (a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. As used in this subsection, three consecutive days means 72 consecutive hours. The court may sentence an offender to both an intervention program and a jail term. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the three-day mandatory jail term or intervention program. However, in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months. 
The court may suspend the execution of the three-day jail term under this subsection if the court, in lieu of that suspended term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to O.R.C. 2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program certified under O.R.C. 5119.38. 
The court also may suspend the execution of any part of the three-day jail term under this subsection if it places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to O.R.C. 2929.25 for part of the three days, requires the offender to attend for the suspended part of the term a drivers' intervention program so certified, and sentences the offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days that the offender does not spend attending the program. The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control and in addition to the required attendance at a drivers' intervention program, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to O.R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose on the offender any other conditions of community control that it considers necessary. 
2.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of at least three consecutive days and a requirement that the offender attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program that is certified pursuant to O.R.C. 5119.38. As used in this subsection, three consecutive days means 72 consecutive hours. If the court determines that the offender is not conducive to treatment in a drivers' intervention program, if the offender refuses to attend a drivers' intervention program, or if the jail at which the offender is to serve the jail term imposed can provide a drivers' intervention program, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term of at least six consecutive days. 
The court may require the offender, under a community control sanction imposed under O.R.C. 2929.25, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to O.R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services, in addition to the required attendance at drivers' intervention program, that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of community control on the offender that it considers necessary. 
3.  In all cases, a fine of not less than $375.00 and not more than $1,075.00. 
4.  In all cases, a class five license suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of O.R.C. 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under O.R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
1.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. The court shall impose the ten-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the ten-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by O.R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
2.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of 20 consecutive days. The court shall impose the 20-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the 20-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by O.R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
3.  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section 303.99, a fine of not less than $525.00 and not more than $1,625.00. 
4.  In all cases, a class four license suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of O.R.C. 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under O.R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.19) 
5.  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for 90 days in accordance with O.R.C. 4503.233 and impoundment of the license plates of that vehicle for 90 days. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.193) 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
1.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (a)(1)A., B., C., D., E., or J. of this section, a mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. The court shall impose the 30-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the 30-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the jail terms set forth in Section 303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year. 
2.  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of subsection (a)(1)F., G., H. or I. or (a)(2) of this section, a mandatory jail term of 60 consecutive days. The court shall impose the 60-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (h)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the 60-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in Section 303.99, the additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year. 
3.  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section 303.99, a fine of not less than $850.00 and not more than $2,750.00. 
4.  In all cases, a class three license suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(3) of O.R.C. 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under O.R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.19) 
5.  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense in accordance with O.R.C. 4503.234. Subsection (h)(5) of this section applies regarding any vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under this subsection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.193) 
6.  In all cases, the court shall order the offender to participate with a community addiction services provider authorized by O.R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. The operator of the services provider shall determine and assess the degree of the offender's alcohol dependency and shall make recommendations for treatment. Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(1)E. of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or four violations of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony of the fourth degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
E.  An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of O.R.C. 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a felony of the third degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in division (F)(2) of O.R.C. 4511.191. 
(3)  If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under subsection (h)(1)B.1. or 2. or (h)(1)C.1. or 2. of this section and if, within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence under this subsection that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days required by subsection (h)(1)B.1. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to five consecutive days in jail and not less than 18 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the five consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed six months. The five consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of 20 consecutive days required by subsection (h)(1)B.2. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to ten consecutive days in jail and not less than 36 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the ten consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring shall not exceed six months. The ten consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days required by subsection (h)(1)C.1. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to 15 consecutive days in jail and not less than 55 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the 15 consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring shall not exceed one year. The 15 consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of 60 consecutive days required by subsection (h)(1)C.2. of this section, the court, under this subsection, may sentence the offender to 30 consecutive days in jail and not less than 110 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the 30 consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed one year. The 30 consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
(4)  If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under subsection (h) of this section and if O.R.C. 4510.13 permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires that the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under O.R.C. 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in division (B) of O.R.C. 4503.231. 
(5)  If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under this section is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of O.R.C. 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national auto dealers association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section. 
(6)  In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under subsection (h) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under subsection (h) of this section. 
(7)  As used in subsection (h) of this section, "electronic monitoring," "mandatory prison term" and "mandatory term of local incarceration" have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 2929.01. 
(i)  Vehicle Operation After Underage Alcohol Consumption Penalty. Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6) of O.R.C. 4510.02. 
(2)  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of O.R.C. 4510.02. 
(3)  If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in O.R.C. 2941.1416 and if the court imposes a jail term for the violation of subsection (b) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant to division (E) of O.R.C. 2929.24. 
(4)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C. 2929.28, in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.19) 
(j)  Physical Control Penalty. Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C. 4510.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.194) 
(k)  Compliance With O.R.C. Ch. 5119 Standards. 
(1)  No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under O.R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services. 
(2)  An offender who stays in a driver's intervention program or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's indigent drivers' alcohol treatment fund. 
(l)  Appeal Does Not Stay Operation of License Suspension. If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension. 
(m)  Subsection (a)(1)J. of this section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that subsection, if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(2)  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(n)  The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in subsection (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of O.R.C. 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited concentration of alcohol. 
(o)  Conflict of Terms. All terms defined in O.R.C. 4510.01 apply to this section. If the meaning of a term defined in O.R.C . 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the same term as defined in O.R.C. 4501.01 or this Traffic Code, the term as defined in O.R.C. 4510.01 applies to this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.19) 
(p)  Indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund. Twenty-five dollars of any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be deposited into the municipal or county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund pursuant to O.R.C. 4511.193. (O.R.C.  4511.193) 
(q)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Equivalent offense means any of the following: 
A.  A violation of division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 4511.19; 
B.  A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance; 
C.  A violation of O.R.C. 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section; 
D.  A violation of division (A)(1) of O.R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions; 
E.  A violation of division (A)(2), (3) or (4) of O.R.C. 2903.06, division (A)(2) of O.R.C. 2903.08, or former O.R.C. 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them; 
F.  A violation of division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 1547.11; 
G.  A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine; 
H.  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 4511.19 or division (A) or (B) or O.R.C. 1547.11; 
I.  A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 4511.19 or division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 1547.11; 
(2)  Mandatory jail term means the mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten, 20, 30, or 60 days that must be imposed under subsection (h)(1)A., B. or C. upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (a) hereof and in relation to which all of the following apply: 
A.  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term must be served in a jail. 
B.  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to O.R.C. 2929.21-2929.28, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(3)  Municipal OVI ordinance and municipal OVI offense mean any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum, or plasma, breath or urine. 
(4)  Community residential sanction, continuous alcohol monitoring, jail, mandatory prison term, mandatory term of local incarceration, sanction and prison term have the same meanings as in O.R.C. 2929.01. 
(5)  Drug of abuse has the same meaning as in O.R.C. 4506.01. 
(6)  Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related means an equivalent offense that is any of the following: 
A.  A violation described in subsection (q)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) hereof; 
B.  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 4511.19; 
C.  A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of O.R.C. 4511.19. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.181) 
333.02 - OPERATION IN WILLFUL OR WANTON DISREGARD OF SAFETY. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.20) 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property other than streets or highways, in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property. 
This subsection does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such operation thereon. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.201) 
(d)  Whenever a person is found guilty under this section of operating a motor vehicle in violation of this section relating to reckless operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of O.R.C. 4510.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.15) 
333.03 - MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed than will permit the person to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)  It is prima-facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or established pursuant to O.R.C. 4511.21 by the Ohio Director of Transportation or Council, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following: 
(1)  A.  Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected; except, that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by subsection (b)(4) hereof and on freeways, if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by subsection (b)(7) hereof. The end of every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section or in the manual and specifications for a uniform system of traffic control devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect. 
B.  As used in this section, "school" means any school chartered under O.R.C. 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. 
C.  As used in this section, "school zone" means that portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or highway. Upon request from the Municipality for streets and highways under its jurisdiction, the Ohio Director of Transportation may extend the traditional school zone boundaries. The distances in subsections (b)(1)C.1-3. hereof shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or combinations thereof the Director approves as most appropriate: 
1.  The distance encompassed by projecting the school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction; 
2.  The distance encompassed by projecting the school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction; 
3.  The distance encompassed by the special marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of highway; 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in subsections (b)(1)A. and C. hereof. 
D.  As used in this subsection, "crosswalk" has the meaning given that term in Section 301.09. The Director may, upon request by resolution of Council, and upon submission by the Municipality of such engineering, traffic and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a state route lying within the Municipality that includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of the crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet on each approach direction of the state route; 
(2)  Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the Municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through highways outside business districts and alleys; 
(3)  Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways within the Municipality outside business districts, except as provided in subsections (b)(4) and (5) hereof; 
(4)  Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways within the Municipality; 
(5)  Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the Municipality outside urban districts unless a lower prima-facie speed is established as further provided in this section; 
(6)  Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the Municipality; 
(7)  Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved shoulders inside the Municipality other than freeways as provided in subsection (b)(10) and (12); 
(8)  Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of rural divided highways; 
(9)  Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on rural expressways without traffic control signals; 
(10)  Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all rural freeways. 
(11)  Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt; 
(12)  Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an interstate freeway outerbelt; 
(c)  It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in subsection (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or any declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in subsection (d) hereof. No person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as follows: 
(1)  At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in subsection (b)(8), (9), (10) and (12) hereof; 
(2)  At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a highway as provided in subsection (b)(8) hereof; 
(3)  At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as provided in subsection (b)(9) hereof, except upon a freeway as provided in subsection (b)(10) hereof; 
(4)  At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided in subsection (b)(10) hereof; 
(5)  At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a speed limit pursuant to O.R.C. 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2). 
(e)  In every charge of violation of this section the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance upon subsection (c) hereof also the speed which subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section declares is prima-facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven. 
(f)  When a speed in excess of both a prima-facie limitation and a limitation in subsection (d) hereof is alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation indicated of both subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in subsection (d) hereof. If the court finds a violation of subsection (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof, or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction under such subsection and dismiss the charge under subsection (d) hereof. If it finds no violation of subsections (b)(1)A. to (b)(6) hereof or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under subsection (d) hereof. 
(g)  Points shall be assessed for violation of a limitation under subsection (d) hereof in accordance with O.R.C. 4510.036. 
(h)  Whenever, in accordance with O.R.C. 4511.21 or this section, the speed limitations as established herein have been altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs. 
(i)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Interstate system" has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C.A. 101. 
(2)  "Commercial bus" means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
(3)  "Noncommercial bus" includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization. 
(4)  "Outerbelt" means a portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director. 
(5)  "Rural" means outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with 23 USC 101, and outside of a business or urban district. 
(j)  (1)  A violation of any provision of this section is one of the following: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (j)(1)B., (1)C., (2) and (3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor; 
B.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this section or of any provision of O.R.C. 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; 
C.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any provision of this section or of any provision of O.R.C. 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of any provision of O.R.C. 4511.21 or of any provision of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to O.R.C. 4511.21 and operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an hour in a business district of a municipal corporation, faster than 50 miles an hour in other portions of a municipal corporation, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1) of this section, if the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in accordance with O.R.C. 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this subsection and if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to pay the fine. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.21) 
333.031 - APPROACHING A STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY, EMERGENCY OR ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with O.R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Section 337.16, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a street or highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due caution and, if possible with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with O.R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle. 
(2)  If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of a type described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic conditions. 
(b)  This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with O.R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
(c)  No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Notwithstanding Section 303.99(b), upon a finding that a person operating a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.213) 
333.032 - SPEED LIMITS ON E. CASE ROAD; SCIOTO, DEPOT AND HALL STREETS; AND MURPHY PARKWAY. 
(a)  It is prima facie lawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed not exceeding ten miles per hour on East Case Road, Scioto Street, Depot Street and Hall Street. 
(b)  It is prima facie lawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed not exceeding 25 miles per hour on Murphy Parkway. 
(Ord. No. 2007-17, 3-20-2007) 
333.04 - STOPPING VEHICLE; SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS. 
(a)  No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with law. 
(b)  Whenever, in accordance with O.R.C. 4511.22(B), the minimum speed limit of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway has been declared and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set forth on such signs. No person shall operate a motor vehicle below the speed limits posted upon such signs except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(c)  In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.22) 
333.05 - SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street at a speed which is greater then the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is posted with authorized signs stating such maximum speed. Such signs shall be erected and maintained at a distance of at least 100 feet before each end of such structure. 
(b)  Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section, proof of the determination of the maximum speed and the existence of such signs shall constitute prima-facie evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.23) 
333.06 - SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES. 
    The prima-facie speed limitations set forth in Section 333.03 do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.24) 
333.07 - STREET RACING PROHIBITED. 
(a)  As used in this section, "street racing" means the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. 
Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful speeds established by Section 333.03 or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing. 
(b)  No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road, street or highway in this Municipality. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more than 3 years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this subsection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.251) 
333.08 - OPERATION WITHOUT REASONABLE CONTROL. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle, agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.202) 
333.09 - RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway without due regard for the safety of persons or property. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property other than streets or highways, without due regard for the safety of persons or property. 
This subsection does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such operation thereon. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
333.10 - OPERATION IN VIOLATION OF IMMOBILIZATION ORDER. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization order issued under O.R.C. 4503.233. 
(b)  A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be criminally forfeited in accordance with the procedures contained in O.R.C. 4503.234. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.236) 
333.11 - TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based communication. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the person's duties; 
(3)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is outside a lane of travel; 
(4)  A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call; 
(5)  A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information, including emergency, traffic or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the motor vehicle; 
(6)  A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves; 
(7)  A person using a device for navigation purposes; 
(8)  A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device or a feature or function of the device; 
(9)  A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data; 
(10)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or function of the vehicle. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (a) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed. 
(d)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(e)  A prosecution for a violation of O.R.C. 4511.204 does not preclude a prosecution for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of O.R.C. 4511.204 and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under O.R.C. 2941.25. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Electronic wireless communications device includes any of the following: 
A.  A wireless telephone; 
B.  A text-messaging device; 
C.  A personal digital assistant; 
D.  A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; 
E.  Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed or used to communicate text. 
(2)  Voice-operated or hands-free device means a device that allows the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication without the use of either hand except to activate, or deactivate a feature or function. 
(3)  Write, send or read a text-based communication means to manually write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless communications device, including manually writing or sending, or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic mail. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.204) 
CHAPTER 335 - LICENSING; ACCIDENTS[8] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Glass removal from street after accident,  311.01 
State Law reference- Deposit of driver's license as bond, O.R.C.  2937.221; Motor vehicle licensing law, O.R.C. Ch. 4503; Driver's license law, O.R.C. Ch. 4507; Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain violations, O.R.C. Ch. 4510; State point system suspension, O.R.C.  4510.03.6; State accident reports, O.R.C.  4509.01(J), 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11; Motorized bicycle operator's license O.R.C.  4511.521 

335.01 - DRIVER'S LICENSE OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  (1)  No person, except those expressly exempted under O.R.C.  4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid driver's license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4507 or a commercial driver's license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4506. 
(2)  No person, except a person expressly exempted under O.R.C.  4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under O.R.C. Ch. 4507. The license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted license as provided in O.R.C.  4507.14, if the person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle. 
(b)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver's or commercial driver's license at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial driver's license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state or any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial driver's license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21-2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. 
The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of O.R.C.  4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license bearing the motorcycle endorsement or the offender's restricted license was expired at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender's last violation of O.R.C.  4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. 
(e)  If the offender is sentenced under subsection (c)(2) hereof, if within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender's license was expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.12) 
335.02 - PERMITTING OPERATION WITHOUT VALID LICENSE; ONE LICENSE PERMITTED. 
(a)  No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking knowing the operator does not have a valid driver's license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under O.R.C. Ch. 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4506. 
(b)  No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until he surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to him by another jurisdiction recognized by the State of Ohio. No person shall be permitted to have more than one valid license at any time. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.02) 
(c)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21-2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00 and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4507.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.02; 4507.99) 
335.03 - DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT; CURFEW. 
(a)  No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under O.R.C.  4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in violation of the following conditions: 
(1)  If the permit is issued to a person who is at least 15 years six months of age, but less than 16 years of age: 
A.  The permit and identification card are in the holder's immediate possession; 
B.  The holder is accompanied by an eligible adult who actually occupies the seat beside the permit holder and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in O.R.C.  4511.19(A); 
C.  The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(2)  If the permit is issued to a person who is at least 16 years of age: 
A.  The permit and identification card are in the holder's immediate possession; 
B.  The holder is accompanied by a licensed operator who is at least 21 years of age and is actually occupying a seat beside the driver and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in O.R.C.  4511.19(A); 
C.  The total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under O.R.C.  4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
The holder of a permit issued under O.R.C.  4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state and is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Section 333.01(a). 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Eligible adult means any of the following: 
A.  An instructor of a driver education course approved by the Department of Education or a driver training course approved by the Department of Public Safety; 
B.  Any of the following persons who holds a current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state: 
1.  A parent, guardian or custodian of the permit holder; 
2.  A person 21 years of age or older who acts in loco parentis of the permit holder. 
(2)  Occupant restraining device has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4513.263. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.05) 
335.031 - DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE; CURFEW. 
(1)  A.  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian. 
B.  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian. 
(2)  A.  Subject to subsection (c)(1) of this section, subsection (a)(1)A. of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver's license who is doing either of the following: 
1.  Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer. 
2.  Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school; 
3.  Traveling to or from an official religious event between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official affiliated with the event. 
B.  Subsection (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver's license who is doing either of the following: 
1.  Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer. 
2.  Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school; 
3.  Traveling to or from an official religious event between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official affiliated with the event. 
(3)  An employer, school official or official affiliated with a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver's license with the written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and holders of probationary driver's licenses may utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that subsection. 
(4)  No holder of a probationary driver's license who has held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by the probationary license holder's parent, guardian or custodian. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or B. of this section; or the holder was an emancipated minor. 
(c)  (1)  If a person is issued a probationary driver's license prior to attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is issued the probationary driver's license, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established under subsection (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court under that subsection. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division. 
(3)  No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(d)  No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as required by subsection (d) hereof, or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons if the requirement in that subsection has been or is being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that requirement. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or B. hereof has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for such violation. 
(g)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Occupant restraining device has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4513.263. 
(2)  Family member of a probationary license holder includes any of the following: 
A.  A spouse; 
B.  A child or stepchild; 
C.  A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law; 
D.  An aunt or uncle; 
E.  A sibling, whether or the whole or half blood or by adoption, a brother-in-law or a sister-in-law; 
F.  A son or daughter of the probationary license holder's stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder; 
G.  An eligible adult, as defined in O.R.C.  4507.05. 
(3)  Moving violation means any violation of any statute or ordinance that regulates the operation of vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys on the highways or streets. "Moving violation" does not include a violation of O.R.C.  4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration. 
(h)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.071) 
335.032 - USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE PROHIBITED WHILE DRIVING. 
(a)  No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an electronic wireless communications device. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to either of the following: 
(1)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a lane of travel; 
(3)  A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving. 
(c)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined $150.00. In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of 60 days. 
(2)  If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates this section shall be fined $300.00. In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person's driver's license or permit for a definite period of one year. 
(d)  The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of O.R.C.  4511.205 does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of O.R.C.  4511.205 and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under O.R.C.  2941.25. 
(e)  As used in this section, "electronic wireless communications device" includes any of the following: 
(1)  A wireless telephone; 
(2)  A personal digital assistant; 
(3)  A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; 
(4)  A text-messaging device; 
(5)  Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.205) 
335.04 - CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or altered; 
(2)  Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; 
(3)  Display or represent as one's own, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the person so displaying the same; 
(4)  Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled; 
(5)  In any application for an identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact, or present any physician's statement required under O.R.C.  4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or fictitious. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.30) 
335.05 - WRONGFUL ENTRUSTMENT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges. 
(2)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under O.R.C. Ch. 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or this Traffic Code. 
(3)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition contained in O.R.C. Ch. 4509. 
(4)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving would violate O.R.C.  4511.19 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. 
(5)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under O.R.C.  4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under that order. 
(b)  Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence in determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a category described in subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section if any of the following applies: 
(1)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (a)(1), (3) or (5) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or affinity. 
(2)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's license, permit or privilege. 
(3)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in subsection (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle and shall be punished as provided in subsections (c) to (h) of this section. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21-2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02. 
(2)  A.  If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of O.R.C.  4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
B.  Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) or (5) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties imposed under Section 303.99, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C.  4510.02, and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3)B. or C. of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.233. 
B.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of O.R.C.  4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.233. 
C.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4511.203 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.234. 
If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this subsection is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of O.R.C.  4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national automobile dealer's association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this subsection shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of O.R.C.  4503.234. 
(d)  If a court orders the immobilization of a vehicle under subsection (c) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(e)  If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under subsection (c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the registration of the vehicle. 
(f)  This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in O.R.C.  4549.65. 
(g)  Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section or a substantially similar municipal ordinance shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the person's name. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.203) 
335.06 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE. 
(a)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is properly made and the operator has the operator's driver's license on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed under O.R.C. Ch. 4507 when the person does not have the person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima- facie evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4507.35 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4507.35) 
335.07 - DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR LICENSE RESTRICTION. 
(a)  Except as provided under subsection (b) hereof and Sections 335.072 and 335.074, no person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than O.R.C. Ch. 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the person's license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this Municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving privileges. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality in violation of any restriction of the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit imposed under division (D) of O.R.C.  4506.10 or under O.R.C.  4507.14. 
(c)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (b) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
(2)  A.  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2)B. or C. of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of O.R.C.  4510.11 or O.R.C.  4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for 30 days in accordance with O.R.C.  4503.233. 
B.  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of O.R.C.  4510.11 or any combination of two violations of O.R.C.  4510.11 or O.R.C.  4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for 60 days in accordance with O.R.C.  4503.233. 
C.  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.11, or any combination of three or more violations of O.R.C.  4501.11 or O.R.C.  4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the state. 
(e)  Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(f)  Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from the court, neither the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of the offense that lead to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. The Registrar shall then take necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle. 
(g)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.11) 
(h)  Any person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under this section and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this subsection. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.037) 
335.071 - DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION. 
(a)  No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under O.R.C.  4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under O.R.C.  4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of the suspension. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under O.R.C. Ch. 2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
A.  A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to subsection (c) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic monitoring imposed under this subsection shall not exceed six months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this subsection, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months. 
B.  A fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
C.  A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section. 
(2)  If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
A.  A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in O.R.C. Ch. 2929, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to subsection (c) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year. 
B.  Notwithstanding the fines provided for in O.R.C. Ch. 2929, a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00. 
C.  A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section. 
(3)  If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
A.  A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in O.R.C. Ch. 2929, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term. 
B.  Notwithstanding the fines set forth in O.R.C. Ch. 2929, a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00. 
C.  A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest with electronic monitoring under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of sentencing. 
An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that period. 
(d)  Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund or municipal indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that court, as created by the county or municipal corporation pursuant to division (H) of O.R.C.  4511.191. 
(e)  In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
When permitted as specified in O.R.C.  4510.021, if the court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under O.R.C.  4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in division (B) of that section. 
A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under O.R.C.  3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a commercial driver's license under O.R.C.  4506.16 shall be issued a driver's license under O.R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period for which the commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be issued a driver's license under O.R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period of the suspension. 
(f)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.14) 
(g)  (1)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to O.R.C.  4510.14, the court, in addition to and independent of any sentence that it imposes upon the offender for the offense, if the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, shall do whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of O.R.C.  4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of O.R.C.  4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the immobilization for 30 days of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for 30 days of the license plates of that vehicle in accordance with O.R.C.  4503.233. 
B.  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of O.R.C.  4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of O.R.C.  4507.02, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the immobilization for 60 days of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for 60 days of the license plates of that vehicle in accordance with O.R.C.  4503.233. 
C.  If, within six years of the current offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of O.R.C.  4507.02 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former division, the court shall order the criminal forfeiture to the State of the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense. 
(2)  An order for immobilization and impoundment of a vehicle under this section shall be issued and enforced in accordance with O.R.C.  4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(3)  An order for criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under this section shall be issued and enforced under O.R.C.  4503.234. Upon receipt of a copy of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a Deputy Registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take the necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.161) 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Electronic monitoring has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(2)  Equivalent offense means any of the following: 
A.  A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to subsection (a) of this section; 
B.  A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially equivalent to subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Jail has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(4)  Mandatory jail term means the mandatory term in jail of three, ten, or 30 consecutive days that must be imposed under subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply: 
A.  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term must be served in a jail. 
B.  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.14) 
335.072 - DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION. 
(a)  No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or canceled pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by O.R.C. Ch. 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during the period in which the person is required by O.R.C.  4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of O.R.C.  4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality if the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a judgment. 
(c)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (b) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(d)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be punished as provided in subsection (d) hereof. Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (d) hereof. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.16, or any combination of two violations of O.R.C.  4510.16 or O.R.C.  4510.11 or 4510.111, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.16) 
(e)  No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of financial responsibility in accordance with O.R.C.  4509.101 shall produce any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial responsibility made in accordance with O.R.C.  4509.101. Whoever violates this subsection (e) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4509.102) 
335.073 - DRIVING WITHOUT COMPLYING WITH LICENSE REINSTATEMENT REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(b)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima- facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by the person at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) hereof. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) hereof may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a license and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of O.R.C.  4510.21(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.21) 
335.074 - DRIVING UNDER LICENSE FORFEITURE OR CHILD SUPPORT SUSPENSION. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license has been suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22 or 4510.33. 
(b)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima- facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be sentenced pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of O.R.C.  2929.28, the offender may be fined up to $1,000.00; and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of O.R.C.  2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of O.R.C.  2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case. 
(2)  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of subsection (A) of O.R.C.  4510.111, or any combination of two or more violations of subsection (A) of O.R.C.  4510.111, or O.R.C.  4510.11 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.111) 
335.08 - OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle for which a certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance with O.R.C. Ch. 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this Municipality knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas; 
(2)  Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 4505; 
(3)  Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in O.R.C. Ch. 4505; 
(4)  Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of a court of common pleas as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 4505 in case of the destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title; 
(5)  Violate any rules adopted pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 4505; 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided in O.R.C. Ch. 4505 and Ch. 4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle the ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with O.R.C.  4505.06 and subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act," 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981; 
(7)  Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled. 
(b)  This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage disposition. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4505.18) 
335.09 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the distinctive number and registration mark, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under O.R.C.  4503.19 and 4503.191, furnished by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility. 
No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under O.R.C.  4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.21) 
335.10 - EXPIRED OR UNLAWFUL LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle which is parked or operated upon the public streets or highways shall fail to annually file the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor, as required by O.R.C. Ch. 4503. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.11) 
(b)  No person shall operate, drive or park upon the public streets or highways a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.11) 
(c)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of Ohio shall operate, drive or park the motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways, while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws of Ohio relating to the registration and identification of motor vehicles. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.12) 
(d)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or highway upon which is displayed an expired license plate or an expired validation sticker. 
(e)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that were issued on an application for registration that contains any false statement by the applicant. 
(f)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense. 
(3)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.11; 4549.12) 
335.11 - USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES; TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the streets in this Municipality if it displays a license plate or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is fictitious; 
(2)  Is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive number or identification mark; 
(3)  Belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this Municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in this Municipality, during the 30-day period described in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.08) 
(c)  Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner shall immediately remove the license plates from the motor vehicle. The transfer of the registration and, where applicable, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they originally were issued to a succeeding motor vehicle purchased by the same person in whose name the original registration and license plates were issued shall be done within a period not to exceed 30 days. During that 30-day period, the license plates from the motor vehicle for which they originally were issued may be displayed on the succeeding motor vehicle, and the succeeding motor vehicle may be operated on the streets of the Municipality. 
(d)  Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.12(A), (A)(4), (D)) 
335.12 - STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON STREETS; COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE. 
(a)  (1)  In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop the operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the operator has given the operator's name and address and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following: 
A.  Any person injured in the accident or collision; 
B.  The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle damaged in the accident or collision; 
C.  The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision. 
(2)  In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record the information required to be given under subsection (a)(1) of this section, the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the operator's name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance. 
(3)  If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a person, failure to stop after an accident is whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2)B. of this section, a felony of the fifth degree; 
B.  If the offender knew that the accident or collision resulted in serious physical harm to a person, a felony of the fourth degree. 
(3)  If the accident or collision results in the death of a person, failure to stop after an accident is whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  Except as provided in subsection(b)(3)B. of this section, a felony of the third degree; 
B.  If the offender knew that the accident or collision resulted in the death of a person, a felony of the second degree. 
(4)  In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in O.R.C.  4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this section. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.02) 
335.13 - STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON PROPERTY OTHER THAN STREET. 
(a)  (1)  In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any other person, the operator shall give that person the operator's name and address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator's driver's or commercial driver's license. 
(2)  If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or collision does not provide the information specified in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident or collision occurred. 
(3)  If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required under subsection (a)(1) of this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2)B. of this section, a felony of the fifth degree; 
B.  If the offender knew that the accident or collision resulted in serious physical harm to a person, a felony of the fourth degree. 
(3)  If the accident or collision results in the death of a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (b)(3)B. of this section, a felony of the third degree; 
B.  If the offender knew that the accident or collision resulted in the death of a person, a felony of the second degree. 
(4)  In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in O.R.C.  4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this section. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.021) 
335.14 - VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and of the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if available, shall exhibit the driver's or commercial driver's license. 
If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after the accident, shall forward to the police authority in the municipality in which the accident or collision occurred, the same information required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is known. 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in O.R.C.  4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000.00 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4549.03) 
335.15 - RULES ESTABLISHING SERVICE FEES. 
(a)  Not later than nine months after the effective date of this section, the registrar of motor vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance with O.R.C. ch. 119 establishing a service fee that applies for purposes of O.R.C.  4503.03, 4503.036, 4503.042, 4503.10, 4503.102, 4503.12, 4503.182, 4503.24, 4505.061, 4506.08, 4507.24, 4507.50, 4507.52, 4509.05, 4519.03, 4519.05, 4519.10, 4519.56, and 4519.69. The service fee shall be not more than $5.25. When establishing the fee, the registrar shall consider inflation and any other factors the registrar considers to be relevant to the determination. 
(b)  Not later than nine months after the effective date of this section, the registrar shall adopt rules in accordance with O.R.C. ch. 119 establishing prorated service fees that apply for purposes of multi-year registrations authorized under O.R.C.  4503.103. When establishing the fee, the registrar shall consider inflation and any other factors the registrar considers to be relevant to the determination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.038) 
335.16 - ADDITIONAL COUNTY MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX. 
(A)  (1)  The Board Of County Commissioners of a county may, by resolution, levy an annual license tax upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public roads and highways in that county for any authorized purpose. A tax levied under this section is in addition to the tax levied by O.R.C.  4503.02 and 4503.07 and any other tax levied under this chapter. The tax shall be at the rate of $5.00 per motor vehicle on all motor vehicles the district of registration of which is located in the county levying the tax, as defined in O.R.C.  4503.10. The rate of the tax is in addition to the tax rates prescribed in O.R.C.  4503.04 and 4503.042 and is subject to both of the following: 
A.  The reductions in the manner provided in O.R.C.  4503.11; 
B.  The exemptions provided in O.R.C.  4503.16, 4503.17, 4503.172, 4503.173, 4503.18, 4503.41, 4503.43, 4503.46, and 4503.571. 
(2)  As used in subsection (a)(1) of this section, "authorized purpose" means any of the following: 
A.  Paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this section; 
B.  Planning, constructing, improving, maintaining, and repairing public roads, highways, and streets; 
C.  Maintaining and repairing bridges and viaducts; 
D.  Paying the county's portion of the costs and expenses of cooperating with the department of transportation in the planning, improvement, and construction of state highways; 
E.  Paying the county's portion of the compensation, damages, costs, and expenses of planning, constructing, reconstructing, improving, maintaining, and repairing roads and streets; 
F.  Paying any costs apportioned to the county under O.R.C.  4907.47; 
G.  Paying debt service charges on notes or bonds of the county issued for such purposes; 
H.  Paying all or part of the costs and expenses of municipal corporations in planning, constructing, reconstructing, improving, maintaining, and repairing highways, roads, and streets designated as necessary or conducive to the orderly and efficient flow of traffic within and through the county pursuant to O.R.C.  4504.03; 
I.  Purchasing, erecting, and maintaining street and traffic signs and markers; 
J.  Purchasing, erecting, and maintaining traffic lights and signals; 
K.  Supplementing revenue already available for the aforementioned purposes. 
(b)  Prior to the adoption of any resolution under this section, the Board of County Commissioners shall conduct two public hearings on the resolution, the second hearing to be not less than three but not more than ten days after the first hearing. The board shall provide notice of the date, time, and place of both hearings by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, or as provided in O.R.C.  7.16, once a week on the same day of the week for two consecutive weeks. The second publication shall be not less than ten but not more than 30 days prior to the first hearing. 
(c)  No resolution adopted under this section shall become effective sooner than 30 days following its adoption. A resolution under this section is subject to a referendum as provided in O.R.C.  305.31 to 305.41. No resolution levying a tax under this section for which a referendum vote has been requested shall go into effect unless approved by a majority of those voting upon it. 
(d)  If a Board of County Commissioners adopts a resolution to levy a county license tax under this section, the board shall provide written notice of the adoption of the resolution to the legislative authority of each municipal corporation that is located in the county and to the board of township trustees of each township that is located in the county. 
(e)  A county license tax levied under this section continues in effect until repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4504.24) 
335.17 - BASEBALL FOR ALL LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Baseball for All" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Baseball for All" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Baseball for All" license plates shall be inscribed with the words "Baseball for All" and markings that are designed by the Grove City little league board and approved by the registrar. "Baseball for All" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Baseball for All" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall deposit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Baseball for All" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.87) 
335.18 - PANCREATIC CANCER AWARENESS LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that promote pancreatic cancer awareness and are approved by the registrar. "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(C)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $25.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Pancreatic Cancer Awareness" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.495) 
335.19 - CUYAHOGA VALLEY NATIONAL PARK LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and the issuance of "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that are designed by the conservancy for Cuyahoga Valley National Park and approved by the registrar. "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(C)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall deposit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Cuyahoga Valley National Park" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.565) 
335.20 - FALLEN LINEMEN LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Fallen Linemen" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Fallen Linemen" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed thereon, "Fallen Linemen" license plates shall be inscribed with words and markings selected and designed by the fallen linemen organization and approved by the registrar. "Fallen Linemen" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Fallen Linemen" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $10.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Fallen Linemen" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.715) 
335.21 - OHIO BATTLEFLAG LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Ohio Battleflag" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Ohio Battleflag" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Ohio Battleflag" license plates shall be inscribed with the words "In God We Trust" and markings, including a United States flag and Ohio burgee flag, that are designed by the Ohio history connection and approved by the registrar. "Ohio Battleflag" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Ohio Battleflag" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Ohio Battleflag" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.763) 
335.22 - I STAND WITH ISRAEL LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "I Stand with Israel" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "I Stand with Israel" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "I Stand with Israel" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that are designed by the friends of united Hatzalah of Israel and approved by the registrar. "I Stand with Israel" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "I Stand with Israel" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $20.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "I Stand with Israel" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.97) 
335.23 - OHIO ASSOCIATION OF CHILD CARING AGENCIES LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates with a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates shall bear words and markings that are designed by the Ohio association of child caring agencies and approved by the registrar. "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. Chapter 4504., any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $25.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Ohio Association of Child Caring Agencies" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.528) 
335.24 - OHIO NURSES ASSOCIATION LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and the issuance of "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that are designed by the Ohio nurses association and approved by the registrar. "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. Chapter 4504., any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1) ..... For each initial application for registration the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $25.00. For each registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $11.50. The registrar shall deposit all such contributions into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Ohio Nurses Association" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.529) 
335.25 - NATIONAL AVIATION HALL OF FAME LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that promote the national aviation hall of fame and are approved by the registrar. "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  The "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "National Aviation Hall of Fame" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.577) 
335.26 - MONARCH BUTTERFLY LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Monarch Butterfly" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Monarch Butterfly" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Monarch Butterfly" license plates shall be inscribed with identifying words or markings that are designed by monarch wings across Ohio and that are approved by the registrar. "Monarch Butterfly" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Monarch Butterfly" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Monarch Butterfly" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.592) 
335.27 - BRECKSVILLE-BROADVIEW HEIGHTS CITY SCHOOLS LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, commercial motor vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles, and, effective January 1, 2017, the owner or lessee of any motor-driven cycle or motor scooter may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates shall be inscribed with words and markings selected and designed by the Brecksville-Broadview Heights city school district and that are approved by the registrar. "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1) ..... For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $30.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Brecksville-Broadview Heights City Schools" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(d)  Sections 4503.77 and 4503.78 of the Ohio Revised Code do not apply to license plates issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.903) 
335.28 - GLOBAL WAR ON TERRORISM CIVILIAN SERVICE MEDAL LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  Any person who has been awarded the global war on terrorism civilian service medal may apply to the registrar of motor vehicles for the registration of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar that the person owns or leases. The application shall be accompanied by such documentary evidence in support of the global war on terrorism civilian service medal as the registrar may require. The application may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. 
Upon receipt of an application for registration of a motor vehicle under this section and the required taxes and fees, and upon presentation of the required supporting evidence of the award of the global war on terrorism civilian service medal, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate motor vehicle registration and a set of license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on license plates, the license plates shall be inscribed with appropriate words indicating the applicable award and display a reproduction of the global war on terrorism civilian service medal. The license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
The license plates and a validation sticker or, when applicable, a validation sticker alone shall be issued upon payment of the regular license tax required by O.R.C.  4503.04, payment of any local motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, payment of any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
The registrar shall not issue license plates under this section unless the registrar first receives written permission from the United States department of defense allowing the registrar to place the image of the global war on terrorism civilian service medal on the license plates. 
(b)  No person who is not a recipient of the global war on terrorism civilian service medal shall purposefully represent that the person is a recipient of any such medal for the purpose of obtaining license plates under this section. No person shall own a motor vehicle bearing license plates issued under this section unless the person is eligible to be issued those license plates. 
(c)  Sections 4503.77 and 4503.78 of the Ohio Revised Code do not apply to license plates issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.536) 
335.29 - COMBAT MEDICAL BADGE LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  Any army veteran who has been awarded the combat medical badge may apply to the registrar of motor vehicles for the registration of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar that the person owns or leases. The application shall be accompanied by such documentary evidence in support of the award as the registrar may require. The application may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. 
Upon receipt of an application for registration of a motor vehicle under this section and the required taxes and fees, and upon presentation of the required supporting evidence of the award of the combat medical badge, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate motor vehicle registration and a set of license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on license plates, the license plates shall be inscribed with the words "combat medical badge" and bear a reproduction of the combat medical badge. The license plates shall bear county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.13. 
The license plates and a validation sticker or, when applicable, a validation sticker alone shall be issued upon payment of the regular license tax required by O.R.C.  4503.04, payment of any local motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, payment of any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(b)  No person who is not a recipient of the combat medical badge shall willfully and falsely represent that the person is a recipient of the combat medical badge for the purpose of obtaining license plates under this section. No person shall own a motor vehicle bearing license plates issued under this section unless the person is eligible to be issued those license plates. 
(c)  Sections 4503.77 and 4503.78 of the Ohio Revised Code do not apply to license plates issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.538) 
335.30 - CHAGRIN FALLS EXEMPTED VILLAGE SCHOOLS LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, commercial motor vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles, and, effective January 1, 2017, the owner or lessee of any motor-driven cycle or motor scooter may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with divisions (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates shall be inscribed with words and markings selected and designed by Chagrin Falls exempted village school district and that are approved by the registrar. "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $30.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Chagrin Falls Exempted Village Schools" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(D)  Sections 4503.77 and 4503.78 of the Ohio Revised Code do not apply to license plates issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.904) 
335.31 - STREET ROD LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of street rod license plates. The application for street rod license plates may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance with subsection (b) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of street rod license plates with a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed thereon, street rod license plates shall be inscribed with words and markings selected and designed by the western reserve historical society and approved by the registrar. Street rod license plates shall bear county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  Street rod license plates and validation stickers shall be issued upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, the contribution specified in subsection (c) of this section, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. If the application for street rod license plates is combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, the license plates and validation sticker shall be issued upon payment of the contribution, fees, and taxes contained in this division and the additional fee prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42. 
(c)  For each application for registration and registration renewal submitted under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $15.00. The registrar shall pay this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
The registrar shall pay the $10.00 bureau administrative fee, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in issuing street rod license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.555) 
335.32 - CLEVELAND ST. IGNATIUS HIGH SCHOOL LICENSE PLATES. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of any passenger car, noncommercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, commercial motor vehicle, or other vehicle of a class approved by the registrar of motor vehicles, and, effective January 1, 2017, the owner or lessee of any motor-driven cycle or motor scooter may apply to the registrar for the registration of the vehicle and issuance of "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates. An application made under this section may be combined with a request for a special reserved license plate under section 4503.40 or 4503.42 of the Ohio Revised Code. Upon receipt of the completed application and compliance by the applicant with subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the registrar shall issue to the applicant the appropriate vehicle registration and a set of "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates and a validation sticker, or a validation sticker alone when required by O.R.C.  4503.191. 
In addition to the letters and numbers ordinarily inscribed on the license plates, "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates shall be inscribed with words and markings selected and designed by Cleveland St. Ignatius high school and that are approved by the registrar. "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates shall display county identification stickers that identify the county of registration as required under O.R.C.  4503.19. 
(b)  "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates and a validation sticker, or validation sticker alone, shall be issued upon receipt of a contribution as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section and upon payment of the regular license tax as prescribed under O.R.C.  4503.04, any applicable motor vehicle license tax levied under O.R.C. ch. 4504, any applicable additional fee prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.40 or 4503.42, a bureau of motor vehicles administrative fee of $10.00, and compliance with all other applicable laws relating to the registration of motor vehicles. 
(c)  (1)  For each application for registration and registration renewal notice the registrar receives under this section, the registrar shall collect a contribution of $30.00. The registrar shall transmit this contribution into the state treasury to the credit of the license plate contribution fund created in O.R.C.  4501.21. 
(2)  The registrar shall deposit the bureau administrative fee of $10.00, the purpose of which is to compensate the bureau for additional services required in the issuing of "Cleveland St. Ignatius High School" license plates, into the state treasury to the credit of the state bureau of motor vehicles fund created in O.R.C.  4501.25. 
(d)  Sections 4503.77 and 4503.78 of the Ohio Revised Code do not apply to license plates issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4503.902) 
335.33 - REPORT OF FAILURE TO YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. 
(a)  When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by O.R.C.  4511.45(A) impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency, any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. 
(b)  (1)  Upon receipt of a report under division (a) of this section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(2)  If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged violation of O.R.C.  4511.45(A) is established, the law enforcement agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to the operator. 
(3)  If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates O.R.C.  4511.45(A) based on a report filed under subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.00. 
(2)  If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of O.R.C.  4511.45(A) based on a report filed under subsection (a) of this section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person's right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  License plate includes any temporary license placard issued under O.R.C.  4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction. 
(2)  Public safety vehicle does not include an unmarked public safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the public utilities commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.454) 
CHAPTER 337 - SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, O.R.C.  4513.28; Slow moving vehicle emblem, OAC Ch. 4501.13; Motorized bicycle lights and equipment, O.R.C.  4511.521; Vehicle lighting, OAC 4501-15 
Cross reference- Use of stop and turn signals,  331.14; Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles,  339.05; Vehicles transporting explosives,  339.06; Towing requirements,  339.07; Use of studded tires and chains,  339.11; Bicycle equipment,  373.05 et seq. 

337.01 - DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on vehicles do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or agricultural tractors except as made applicable to such articles of machinery. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.02) 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
337.02 - LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS. 
(a)  Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street or highway shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as required by this chapter during all of the following times: 
(1)  The time from sunset to sunrise; 
(2)  At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects on the street or highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead; 
(3)  At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use because of precipitation on the windshield. 
Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under O.R.C.  4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be operated upon a street or highway using only parking lights as illumination. 
(b)  Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the distance from which certain lights and devices shall render objects visible, or within which such lights or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured upon a straight level unlighted street under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated. 
(c)  Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a street or highway to stop the vehicle solely because the officer observes that a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that subsection, or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that subsection. 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.03) 
337.03 - HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.04) 
337.04 - TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
(b)  Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.05) 
337.05 - REAR RED REFLECTORS. 
(a)  Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on a street, other than vehicles of the type mentioned in Section 337.06 or a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lights or separately, two red reflectors of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such vehicle. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.06) 
337.06 - SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. 
(a)  Buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any street, shall be equipped with clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop lights as required by state regulations. Such equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in Section 337.02 except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on a vehicle operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the street at a distance of 500 feet. 
Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically required by Section 337.02 to Section 337.15, inclusive. Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Public Utilities Commission are not subject to this section. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.07) 
337.07 - OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION. 
(a)  Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this section does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be lighted. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.08) 
337.08 - RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS. 
(a)  Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Section 337.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the side and rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.09) 
337.09 - LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES. 
(a)  Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended during the times mentioned in Section 337.02, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street. Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.10) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
337.10 - LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED. 
(a)  All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles referred to in Section 337.01(c), not specifically required to be equipped with lights or other lighting devices by Section 337.02 to 337.09, shall at all times specified in Section 337.02, be equipped with at least one light displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle, and also shall be equipped with two lights displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one light displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlights. 
Lights and reflectors required or authorized by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
(b)  All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or the Municipal or County Engineer, when such construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as set forth in O.R.C.  4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25 miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear. The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 
A unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this section. 
As used in this subsection (b), "machinery" does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal. 
(c)  The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles, and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in subsection (b) hereof operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited. 
(d)  (1)  No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (b) hereof, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in subsection (b) hereof. 
(2)  No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays a slow- moving vehicle emblem as specified in subsection (b) of this section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS). 
(e)  Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (b) of this section, in addition to the use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol may be equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in Section 337.02. When a double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. 
In addition to the lights described in this subsection, farm machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by Section 337.16, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section. 
(f)  Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways: 
(1)  With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with subsection (b) hereof; 
(2)  With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted under this subsection (f); 
(3)  With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective material as specified in this subsection (f). 
The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to O.R.C. Ch. 119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this subsection (f). The rules shall permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible at all times specified in Section 337.02, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. 
(g)  Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this subsection. 
If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the agricultural tractor. 
(h)  When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate. 
(i)  As used in this section, "boat trailer" means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. 
(j)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.11) 
337.11 - SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three state approved auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle, which when used shall conform to state regulations. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.12) 
337.12 - COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights or lights on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.13) 
337.13 - DISPLAY OF LIGHTED LIGHTS. 
(a)  At all times mentioned in Section 337.02 at least two state approved lighted lights shall be displayed conforming to state regulations, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(b)  However, on a motorcycle, there shall be displayed at least one and not more than two lighted lights as required herein. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.14) 
337.14 - USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS. 
(a)  Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in Section 337.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, except that upon approaching an oncoming vehicle, the lights or beams shall be so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.15) 
337.15 - LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in Section 337.02 when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of lights required in Section 337.13, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.16) 
337.16 - NUMBER OF LIGHTS; LIMITATIONS ON FLASHING, OSCILLATING OR ROTATING LIGHTS. 
(a)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights also is equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway. 
(b)  Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candle power, shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle. 
(c)  (1)  Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing. This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles transporting preschool children as provided in O.R.C.  4513.182, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by Section 337.10 to have a flashing red light. 
(2)  When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in subsection (c)(1) hereof does not apply to such machinery or vehicles. Farm machinery also may display the lights described in Section 337.10. 
(d)  Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in Section 301.27, or a school bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State or Municipality, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights either on farm machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery, when used on a street or highway. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.17) 
337.17 - FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS. 
(a)  No person shall use any lights mentioned in Section 337.02 to 337.16, inclusive, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless the lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with state regulations. 
(b)  The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp color requirements contained in federal motor vehicle safety standard number 108, 49 C.F.R. 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation of this subsection. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.19) 
337.18 - MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES. 
(a)  The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(2)  Every motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot. 
(3)  Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under O.R.C.  4511.521. 
(4)  When operated upon the streets or highways of this Municipality, the following vehicles shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942; 
B.  Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001. 
(5)  Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels. 
(6)  In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be employed. 
(7)  Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other sources of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. 
(8)  The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes. 
(9)  Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all conditions of loading of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances: 
From a speed of 20 miles per hour 
Stopping distance 
in feet Deceleration in feet per second Brakes on all wheels 30 14 Brakes not on all four wheels 40 10.7  
From a speed of 20 miles per hour 
(10)  All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.20) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
337.19 - HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
(b)  No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency or public safety vehicle shall be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver of the emergency or public safety vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(c)  No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give warning to other drivers or pedestrians. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.21) 
337.20 - MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates. 
(b)  No person shall own, operate or have in the person's possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any other way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal operation. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.22) 
337.21 - REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the street to the rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles or motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles or motorcycles by mirror. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.23) 
337.22 - WINDSHIELD AND WINDSHIELD WIPER; SIGN OR POSTER THEREON. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not equipped with a windshield. 
(b)  (1)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when in accordance with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle. 
(2)  Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the device meets both of the following: 
A.  It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals. 
B.  It does not conceal the vehicle identification number. 
(3)  Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the device meets both of the following: 
A.  It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals. 
B.  It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle's windshield wipers. 
(c)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.24) 
337.23 - LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE. 
(a)  No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street with any load carried on such vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.30) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
337.24 - MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles. 
When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under O.R.C.  4513.19. 
Historical motor vehicles as defined in O.R.C.  4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.071) 
337.25 - AIR CLEANER REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine unless the carburetion system of the vehicle is protected with an air filter, a flame arresting device, or any other accepted method of protection that is adequate for this purpose. If the original device or system is replaced, it shall be replaced with one that is equal to or better than the original equipment. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a person doing automotive repair work on a motor vehicle that necessitates this device being removed while the work is performed. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
337.26 - CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM USAGE. 
(a)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than 40 pounds. 
(b)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned, leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, or day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than 40 pounds. 
(c)  When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by subsection (a) or (b) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under O.R.C.  5104.011, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards. 
(d)  When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older that 15 years of age and who is not otherwise required by subsection (a), (b) or (c) hereof to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as defined in O.R.C.  4513.263. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section has been or is being committed. 
(f)  The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary to carry out this section. 
(g)  The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a child restraint system, a booster seat or an occupant restraining device as required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section. 
(h)  This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit. 
(i)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section. 
(j)  Whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed to be a single violation of this section: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (j)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $75.00. 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those subsections, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.81) 
337.27 - DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS REQUIRED TO WEAR SEAT BELTS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Automobile means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the "National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966," 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C.A. 1392. 
(2)  Occupant restraining device means a seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Passenger means any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is provided. 
(4)  Commercial tractor, passenger car, and commercial car have the same meanings as provided in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
(5)  Vehicle and motor vehicle, as used in the definitions of the terms set forth in subsection (a)(4) hereof, have the same meanings as provided in Chapter 301. 
(6)  Tort action means a civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to person or property. "Tort action" includes a product liability claim, as defined in O.R.C.  2307.71 and an asbestos claim, as defined in O.R.C.  2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another agreement between persons. 
(b)  No person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted; 
(2)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in subsection (b)(3) hereof is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device; 
(3)  Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device; 
(4)  Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable form. 
(c)  Subsection (b)(3) hereof does not apply to a person who is required by Section 337.26 to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat. Subsection (b)(1) hereof does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Subsections (b)(1) and (3) hereof do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (b) hereof has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed. 
(e)  All fines collected for violations of subsection (b) hereof shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit as provided in O.R.C.  4513.263. 
(f)  (1)  Subject to subsection (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of subsection (b)(1) or (3) or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, in violation of subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall not be considered or used by the trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence. But the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio rules of evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that represents noneconomic loss, as defined in O.R.C.  2307.011 in a tort action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff's failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section. 
(2)  If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following: 
A.  It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant. 
B.  The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer, distributor or seller of the passenger car. 
C.  The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not crashworthy. 
(g)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be fined $30.00. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be fined $20.00. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates subsection (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.263) 
337.28 - USE OF SUNSCREENING, NONTRANSPARENT AND REFLECTORIZED MATERIALS. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State with any sunscreening material, or other product or material which has the effect of making the windshield or windows nontransparent or would alter the windows' color, increase its reflectivity, or reduce its light transmittance, unless the product or material satisfies one of the following exceptions: 
A.  Any manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle until such standard is subsequently repealed or reduced. In "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) "manufacturer" means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, including any person importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale. 
B.  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to the windshield when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of such window, has a light transmittance of not less than 70 percent plus or minus three percent and is not red or yellow in color. 
C.  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to the side windows to the immediate right or left the driver, so long as such material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing materials of such windows, has a light transmittance of not less than 50 percent plus or minus three percent and is not red or yellow in color. 
D.  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied to a window not otherwise listed in subsections (a)(1)A. to C. or E. of this section, except that outside left and right rear view mirrors are required if the sunscreening material is applied to the rear window and the sunscreening material, when used in conjunction with the safety glazing material of such window, has a light tranmsmittance of less than 50 percent plus or minus three percent. 
E.  Any sunscreening material or other product or material applied along the top of the windshield and that does not extend downward beyond the AS-1 line or five inches from the top of the windshield, whichever is closer to the top, is not regulated by this section. 
(2)  No person shall install in any motor vehicle any glass or other material that fails to conform to the specifications of this section. 
(3)  No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined in O.R.C.  4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to the specifications of this section. 
(4)  No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window. 
(5)  No person shall operate on any highway or other public or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State that is equipped with privacy drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds unless the drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds are open and secure during vehicle operation. 
(6)  All motor vehicles, beginning with the 1990 model year, must be equipped with labels identifying sunscreening material. All sunscreening material must indicate the manufacturer's name and the percentage level of light transmission of the material permanently installed between the material and the surface to which the material is applied or affixed. Such label must be legible and must be placed in the lower left-hand corner of the vehicle window when viewed from the outside. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-41-03) 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A motor vehicle registered in this state in the name of a person, or the person's parent, legal guardian or spouse who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4731 or an affidavit signed by an optometrist licensed to practice in this state under O.R.C. Ch. 4725 that states that the person has a physical condition that makes it necessary to equip such motor vehicle with sunscreening material which would be of a light transmittance and/or luminous reflectance in violation of this section. Such affidavit shall be in the possession of the person so afflicted or the driver at all times while in the motor vehicle; 
(2)  The windows to the rear of the driver in chauffeured limousines as defined herein; 
(3)  The windows to the rear of the driver in those vehicles designed and used to transport corpses which include hearses and other vehicles adapted for such use; and 
(4)  The manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle as provided in subsection (a) hereof. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-41-05) 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, certain terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Motor vehicle has the same meaning as specified in Section 301.20. 
(2)  Sunscreening material means products or materials, including film, glazing and perforated sunscreening, which, when applied to the windshield or windows of a motor vehicle, reduce the effects of the sun with respect to light reflectance or transmittance. 
(3)  Transmittance means the ratio of the amount of total light, expressed in percentages, which is allowed to pass through the product or material, including glazing, to the amount of total light falling on the product or material and the glazing. 
(4)  Windshield means the front exterior viewing device of a motor vehicle. 
(5)  Window means any device designed for exterior viewing from a motor vehicle, except the windshield or any roof-mounted viewing device. 
(6)  Manufacturer unless otherwise specified in this section, means any person who engages in the manufacturing or assembling of sunscreening products or materials or any person who fabricates, laminates or tempers a safety glazing material, incorporating, during the manufacturing process, the capacity to reflect or reduce the transmission of light. 
(7)  Chauffeured limousine means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or fewer passengers and is operated for hire on an hourly basis pursuant to a prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and regular route. "Prearranged contract" means an arrangement, made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour or trip. "Chauffeured limousine" does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-41-02) 
(d)  Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.241) 
337.29 - BUMPER HEIGHTS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Passenger car means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle. 
(2)  Multipurpose passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation. 
(3)  Truck means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less. 
(4)  Manufacturer has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
(5)  Gross vehicle weight rating means the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating established for the vehicle. 
(6)  Body floor height means the vertical distance between top of the frame rail and the bottom of the passenger compartment (cab) floor. In the event that the vehicle is a truck body, floor height will be measured by the vertical distance between the passenger compartment (cab) floor and the floor of the truck bed. 
(7)  Bumper height means the vertical distance between the ground and the highest point of the bottom of the bumper, measured when the vehicle is laden on a level surface with the vehicle tires inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure. 
(8)  Frame means the main longitudinal structural members of the chassis of the vehicle or, for vehicles with unitized body construction, the lowest main longitudinal structural members of the body of the vehicle. 
(9)  Wheel track distance means the distance on the ground between the center of the tire tread on one side of the vehicle, and the center of the tire tread on the opposite side. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-43-02) 
(b)  Prohibitions; Application. 
(1)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not conform to the requirements of this section. 
(2)  No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system including the installation of inverted, altered or modified suspension system component parts which results in elevation of the height of the vehicle bumper or frame unit which is not in compliance with this section. 
(3)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state without a bumper on the front and rear of the vehicle if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as standard equipment by the manufacturer. 
(4)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state if the difference in height between the body floor and the top of the frame exceeds four inches. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit either of the following: 
A.  The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs as long as such equipment does not cause the vehicle to be in violation of this section; 
B.  The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state with normal wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the control of the vehicle. 
(6)  This section does not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and similar events. 
(7)  A specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck which does not conform to this section shall not be operated on a street or highway. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-43-03) 
(c)  Specifications. 
(1)  The horizontal bumper shall be at least four and one-half inches in vertical height, centered on the vehicle's centerline, and extend no less than the width of the respective wheel track distances. Bumpers shall be horizontal load bearing bumpers and attached to the vehicle frame to effectively transfer impact when engaged. 
(2)  Maximum bumper heights shall be determined by the type of vehicle at time of manufacture. If other than a passenger vehicle, the maximum bumper height shall be determined by the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) at the time of manufacture. The height shall be measured in terms of the vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of the bumper. Maximum bumper heights are as follows: 
Front (inches) Rear (inches) Passenger Vehicles: 22 22 All Other Vehicles: 4,500 lbs. and under GVWR 24 26 4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR 27 29 7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28 31  
(3)  If the body and/or truck bed height is altered the difference in height between the body floor and/or the truck bed floor to the top of the frame rail shall not exceed four inches. 
(4)  For any vehicle with bumpers or attaching components which have been modified or altered from the original manufacturer's design in order to conform with the maximum bumper requirements of this section, the bumper height shall be measured from a level surface to the bottom of the vehicle frame rail at the most forward and rearward points of the frame rail. Frame rail height if bumper modified or altered: 
Front (inches) Rear (inches) Passenger Vehicles: 22 22 All Other Vehicles: 4,500 lbs. and under GVWR 24 26 4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR 27 29 7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28 31  
(5)  The height restriction in this subsection (c) applies to the distance from the ground to the bottom of the frame rail under any one or more of the following conditions: 
A.  A motor vehicle is not equipped with a front and rear bumper. 
B.  The bumper height relative to the frame rails has been altered. 
C.  A supplemental bumper has been installed or an addition to the original or replacement has been made. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4501-43-04) 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
337.30 - DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS REQUIRED. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals. 
(2)  No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals. 
(b)  Directional signals means an electrical or mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear. 
(c)  All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when in use at the times mentioned in Section 337.02. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.261) 
CHAPTER 339 - COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES[10] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
State Law reference- Weighing vehicle; removal of excess load, O.R.C.  4513.33; Arrest notice of driver, O.R.C.  5577.14 
Cross reference- Slower moving vehicles to be driven in right-hand lane,  331.01(b) 

339.01 - OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE OPERATION ON STATE ROUTES; STATE PERMIT. 
(a)  No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in O.R.C.  5577.01-5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in conformity with O.R.C.  4513.01-4513.37, inclusive, upon any state route within the Municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or upon any local truck route. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer. 
No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or charge for movement on any state route within the Municipality; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any roadway within the Municipality which is not a state route, except as provided in Section 339.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.34) 
(b)  (1)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to gross load limits. 
(2)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of axles. 
(3)  No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority. 
(c)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
339.02 - USE OF LOCAL STREETS; LOCAL PERMIT AND CONDITIONS. 
(a)  Use of Local Streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as specified in Section 339.03 or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon any street in the Municipality other than a State route, except those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage through the Municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a state route or a designated truck route within the Municipality shall confine such deviation to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the departure. 
(b)  Local Permit and Conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets. 
No permitee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction; however, the approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement upon State routes as provided in Section 339.01. 
The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route, hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for any damage to a roadway or road structure. 
For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge the applicant in accordance with the City fee schedule for the permit and each hour of special duty time or any part thereof spent by each police officer in supervising the movement of such vehicle. The charge can be prorated into 15 minute increments. 
Signs shall be posted to apprise drivers of the limitations imposed by this section. Such signs shall be in accordance with the standards for traffic control devices of the State Department of Transportation. No driver shall disobey the instructions indicated on any such sign. 
Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause of immediate revocation or suspension of such permit, and denial of request for any future permit. Such violation shall also subject the violator to the penalty prescribed by subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2013-43, 9-3-2013) 
339.03 - MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the Municipality, whose dimensions exceed those specified in this section. 
(b)  No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of: 
(1)  One hundred four inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively within municipal corporations; 
(2)  One hundred two inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the Ohio Director of Transportation; 
(3)  One hundred thirty-two inches for traction engines; 
(4)  One hundred two inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways; 
(5)  One hundred two inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates. 
(c)  No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of: 
(1)  Sixty-six feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to O.R.C.  306.30-306.54; 
(2)  Forty-five feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles; 
(3)  Fifty-three feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may, by journal entry, prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates; 
(4)  Twenty-eight and one-half feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates; 
(5)  A.  Ninety-seven feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount; 
B.  Seventy-five feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations, when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount; 
(6)  Sixty-five feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in subsections (c)(3) and (4) and in subsection (e) hereof; 
(7)  Fofty-five feet for recreational vehicles. 
(8)  Fifty feet for all other vehicles except trailers and semitrailers, with or without load. 
(d)  No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13 feet six inches, with or without load. 
(e)  An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 65 feet and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of any stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director designates. 
(f)  The widths prescribed in subsection (b) shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge. 
The width prescribed in subsection (b)(5) shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from each side of the vehicle. 
The lengths prescribed in subsections (c)(2) to (8) hereof shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or combination, nonproperty carrying devices or components that do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigeration equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles whose dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
(g)  This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipal corporation or to the volunteer fire department of any municipal corporation or used by such department in the discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment. The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways and streets of this State shall comply with the rules of the Director governing such movement, that the Director may adopt. Ohio Revised Code Sections 119.01 to 119.13 apply to any rules the Director adopts under this section, or the amendment or rescission of the rules, and any person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal as provided in those sections. 
This section does not require the state, the Municipality, County, township or any railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares in the Municipality. 
(h)  As used in this section, "recreational vehicle" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5577.05) 
(i)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5577.99) 
339.04 - ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION. 
    Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route. 
339.05 - WHEEL PROTECTORS. 
(a)  No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, upon the streets, bridges and culverts within this Municipality unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5577.11) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
339.06 - VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES. 
(a)  Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white letters six inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation Regulations. 
(2)  Such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient points on such vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.29) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
339.07 - TOWING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby, and such drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered. 
(b)  When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square. 
(c)  In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is being drawn. The chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle. 
(d)  Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility, as defined in O.R.C.  5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one time, except as follows: 
(1)  An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle; 
(2)  A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to be a motor vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.32) 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
339.08 - LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; REMOVAL REQUIRED; TRACKING MUD. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public place unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public place unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the street, highway or other public place. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.31) 
(c)  No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track or drop mud, stones, gravel or other similar material on any street, highway or other public place. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops or deposits mud, stones, gravel or other similar material or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street, highway or other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.31) 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4513.99) 
339.09 - SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS. 
(a)  In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same. 
(b)  No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes, poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth or a red light or lantern as required by Section 337.08. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
339.10 - VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS. 
(a)  No person shall drive over the improved streets of this Municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, or no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved streets of this Municipality, which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind. "Traction engine" or "tractor," as used in this section, applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.08) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.99) 
339.11 - USE OF STUDDED TIRES AND CHAINS. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "studded tire" means any tire designed for use on a vehicle, and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. "Motor vehicle," "street or highway," "public safety vehicle" and "school bus" have the same meanings as given those terms in Chapter 301. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, no person shall operate any motor vehicle, other than a public safety vehicle or bus, that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway, except during the period extending from November 1 of each year through April 15 of the succeeding year. 
(2)  A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in subsection (b)(1) hereof. 
(c)  This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.081) 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.99) 
339.12 - COMMERCIAL CARS AND BUSES THAT ARE SUBJECT TO APPORTIONED RATES UNDER INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION PLAN ARE NOT SUBJECT TO CERTAIN TAXES. 
    No commercial car that is taxed under division (A) of section 4503.65 of the Revised Code, and no commercial bus that is taxed under division (B) of section 4503.65 of the Revised Code, is subject to a tax established under section 4504.02, 4504.06, 4504.15, 4504.16, 4504.17, 4504.171, 4504.172, 4504.18, or 4504.24 of the Revised Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-50 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4504.201) 
CHAPTER 341 - COMMERCIAL DRIVERS[11] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
Cross reference- Load limits, Ch. 339 
State Law reference- Disqualification, O.R.C.  4506.16; Suspension or revocation of license, O.R.C.  4507.16; Warning devices when disabled on freeways, O.R.C.  4513.28; Arrest notice of driver, O.R.C.  5577.14 

341.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Alcohol concentration means the concentration of alcohol in a person's blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per the following: 
(1)  One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma; 
(2)  Two hundred ten liters of breath; 
(3)  One hundred milliliters of urine. 
    Commercial driver's license means a license issued in accordance with O.R.C. Ch. 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
    Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds; 
(2)  Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more; 
(3)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver; 
(4)  Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16 passengers including the driver; 
(5)  Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended; 
(6)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane. 
    Controlled substance means all of the following: 
(1)  Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the "Controlled Substances Act," 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C.A. 802(6), as amended; 
(2)  Any substance included in schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part 1308, as amended; 
(3)  Any drug of abuse. 
    Disqualification means any of the following: 
(1)  The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person's privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle; 
(2)  Any withdrawal of a person's privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle defect violations; 
(3)  A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. 391. 
    Drive means to drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle. 
    Driver means any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's license. 
    Driver's license means a license issued by the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles that authorizes an individual to drive. 
    Drug of abuse means any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in O.R.C.  4729.01 or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes. 
    Employer means any person, including the Federal Government, any state and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle. 
    Endorsement means an authorization on a person's commercial driver's license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial motor vehicle. 
    Farm truck means a truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the farm, including tile, fence, and every other thing or commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this subsection and is not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in O.R.C.  4923.01. 
    Fatality means the death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of a death. 
    Felony means any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death or specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of the penalty that may be imposed. 
    Foreign jurisdiction means any jurisdiction other than a state. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit. 
    Hazardous materials means any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail. 
    Out-of-service order means a declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that a driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. Public safety vehicle has the same meaning as in divisions (E)(1) and (3) of O.R.C.  4511.01. 
    Recreational vehicle includes every vehicle that is defined as a recreational vehicle in O.R.C.  4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit. 
    School bus has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
    State means a state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia. 
    Tester means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement entered into pursuant to O.R.C.  4506.09. 
    United States means the 50 states and the District of Columbia. 
    Vehicle has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4506.01) 
341.02 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Section 341.02 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. Former O.R.C.  4506.02 from which Section 341.02 was derived was repealed by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 68, effective June 29, 2005. The exemptions are now contained in Section 341.03. 
341.03 - PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality unless the person holds, and has in the person's possession, any of the following: 
A.  A valid commercial driver's license with proper endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state; 
B.  A valid examiner's commercial driving permit issued under O.R.C.  4506.13; 
C.  A valid restricted commercial driver's license and waiver for farm- related service industries issued under O.R.C.  4506.24; 
D.  A valid commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an authorized state driver's license examiner or tester or a person who has been issued and has in the person's immediate possession a current, valid commercial driver's license and who meets the requirements of O.R.C.  4506.06(B). 
(2)  No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section applies to any qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following: 
(1)  A farm truck; 
(2)  Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district; 
(3)  A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons; 
(4)  A recreational vehicle; 
(5)  A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver's license issued under Oh.R.C. Ch. 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that requires additional assistance; 
(6)  A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United States reserved technicians. 
(7)  A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness purposes. "Operated for nonbusiness purposes" means that the commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as "commerce" is defined in 49 C.F.R. 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 4905, 4921, or 4923. 
(8)  A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise. 
(9)  A police SWAT team vehicle. 
(10)  A police vehicle used to transport prisoners. 
(c)  Nothing contained in subsection (b)(5) of this section shall be construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule, or regulation of this State concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4506.03) 
341.04 - PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person's possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one valid driver's license issued by this State, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction; 
(2)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality in violation of an out-of-service order, while the person's driving privilege is suspended, revoked or canceled, or while the person is subject to disqualification; 
(3)  Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality under authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this State for 30 days or longer. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4506.04) 
341.05 - CRIMINAL OFFENSES. 
(a)  No person who holds a commercial driver's license, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle for which a commercial driver's license or permit is required shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measureable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person's blood, breath or urine; 
(2)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of four-hundredths of one percent or more by whole blood or breath; 
(3)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one percent or more by blood serum or blood plasma; 
(4)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of fifty-six-thousandths of one percent or more by urine; 
(5)  Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance; 
(6)  Drive a motor vehicle in violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in O.R.C.  4511.181; 
(7)  Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony; 
(8)  Refuse to submit to a test under O.R.C.  4506.17 or 4511.191; 
(9)  Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person's commercial driver's license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked, suspended, canceled, or disqualified; 
(10)  Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, the offenses of aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter; 
(11)  Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Sections 335.12 to 335.14; 
(12)  Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of O.R.C.  4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings; 
(13)  Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in O.R.C.  3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispose a controlled substance. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4506.15) 
341.06 - EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. 
(a)  Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver of a commercial motor vehicle to provide the applicant's employment history for the ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted: 
(1)  A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's previous employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor vehicle; 
(2)  The dates the applicant was employed by these employers; 
(3)  The reason for leaving each of these employers. 
(b)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any of the following apply: 
(1)  The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended, revoked or canceled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction; 
(2)  The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign jurisdiction; 
(3)  The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state or foreign jurisdiction; 
(4)  The driver has more than one driver's license. 
(c)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of Section 341.05. 
(d)  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver's commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section may be assessed a fine not to exceed $10,000.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4506.20) 
TITLE SEVEN - PARKING 
CHAPTER 351 - PARKING GENERALLY[12] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle,  303.03; Parking near stopped fire apparatus,  331.27; Lights on parked or stopped vehicles,  337.09 
State Law reference- Owner nonliability, lease defense, O.R.C.  4511.071 

351.01 - POLICE MAY REMOVE UNATTENDED VEHICLE WHICH OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC. 
    Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.67) 
351.02 - REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA-FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING. 
    In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima-facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such ownership. 
351.03 - PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk, curb or street lawn area, except as provided in subsection (b) hereof; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control device; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by a traffic control device; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street, or within a street tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, or where the curbing or street is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of the maximum time limited by signs; 
(15)  Within one foot of another parked vehicle; 
(16)  On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway. 
(b)  A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park on a sidewalk, a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not larger than 150 cubic centimeters, or a bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, or bicycle does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation of Section 331.37. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.68) 
351.04 - PARKING NEAR CURB; HANDICAPPED LOCATIONS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LOTS AND GARAGES. 
(a)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb side wheels of such vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. 
(b)  (1)  This subsection does not apply to streets or parts thereof where angle parking is lawfully permitted. However, no angle parking shall be permitted on a state route unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25 feet is available for free-moving traffic. 
(2)  A.  No angled parking space that is located on a state route within a municipal corporation is subject to elimination, irrespective of whether there is or is not at least 25 feet of unoccupied roadway width available for free-moving traffic at the location of that angled parking space, unless the municipal corporation approves of the elimination of the angled parking space. 
B.  Replacement, repainting or any other repair performed by or on behalf of the municipal corporation of the lines that indicate the angled parking space does not constitute an intent by the municipal corporation to eliminate the angled parking space. 
(c)    
(1)  A.  Except as provided in subsection (c)(1)B. hereof, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or highway. 
B.  The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or highway. 
(2)  The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any rule, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of facilities near, on, over or under a street, may stop, stand or park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagman is on duty, or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
(e)  Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces shall be provided and designated by the Municipality and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities, where parking is provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this subsection and O.R.C.  3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location. 
(f)    
(1)  A.  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under subsection (e) hereof, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with subsection (e) hereof, unless one of the following applies: 
1.  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; 
2.  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates. 
B.  Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking location in violation of subsection (f)(1)A. of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the Police Department. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. 
C.  If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (f)(1)A. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria contained in O.R.C.  4503.44(A)(1). 
(2)  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location provided under subsection (e) of this section or at a special clearly marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that subsection. 
(g)  When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Handicapped person means any person who has lost the use of one or both legs, or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or so severely handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary or other handicapping condition. 
(2)  Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4503.44. 
(3)  Special license plates and removable windshield placard mean any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued under O.R.C.  4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country or sovereignty. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.69) 
351.05 - MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING. 
    Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
351.06 - SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
351.07 - UNATTENDED VEHICLE: DUTY TO STOP ENGINE, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND TURN WHEELS. 
(a)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property; 
(2)  A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked; 
(3)  An emergency vehicle; 
(4)  A public safety vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.661) 
351.08 - OPENING VEHICLE DOOR ON TRAFFIC SIDE. 
    No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.70(C)) 
351.09 - TRUCK LOADING ZONES. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
351.10 - BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted as such, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking provisions at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
351.11 - PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
351.12 - PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS. 
    Upon any street or highway outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street or highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of such street or highway. In every event, a clear and unobstructed portion of the street or highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such street or highway. 
    This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.66) 
351.13 - PARKING ON POSTED PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
    If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous manner, prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's consent; 
(2)  Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or regulation posted by the owner. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.681) 
351.14 - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU. 
(a)  It is hereby established in the Municipality of Powell a Parking Violations Bureau for administrative collection of fines levied pursuant to Chapter 351 of the Codified Ordinances of the Municipality of Powell. 
(b)  The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the direct, administrative control of the Chief of Police who may promulgate such additional rules and regulations as are necessary for operation of the Bureau. 
(c)  The Chief shall establish and adopt a parking violation citation approved by the Law Director and Prosecutor and provide for administrative control of each and every parking violation ticket issued. 
(Ord. No. 99-31, 6-15-1999) 
351.99 - PENALTY. 
(a) 351.01 Unattended Vehicle-Obstructing Traffic $ 20.00 351.03 Prohibited Standing or Parking Places  20.00 351.04 Parking Near Curb  20.00 351.04(f) Handicapped Parking  40.00 351.05 Manner of Angle Parking  20.00 351.06 Selling, washing, or repairing on roadway  20.00 351.07 Unattended Vehicle-Motor Running  20.00 351.08 Opening Vehicle Door on Traffic Side  20.00 351.09 Truck Parking  20.00 351.11 Parking in Alleys and Narrow Streets  20.00 351.12 Parking on Streets or Highway  20.00 303.08 Excess of 48 hour parking (Impound)  20.00  
(b)  Any of the above fines paid within seven days of the issuance of the citation shall be reduced by 50 percent. 
(c)  Violation of any other section of Chapter 351 of the Codified Ordinances of the Municipality of Powell shall entail a penalty, if not included herein, as specified in Codified Ordinances Section 303.99. 
(Ord. No. 99-30, 6-15-1999) 
TITLE NINE - PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES 
CHAPTER 371 - PEDESTRIANS[13] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
Cross reference- Pedestrian defined,  301.22; Pedestrian prohibited on freeways,  303.06; Obedience to traffic control devices,  313.01, 313.03; Pedestrian control signals,  313.05 

371.01 - RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place, not in operation or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield or if required by Section 313.09, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(c)  Subsection (a) hereof does not apply under the conditions stated in Section 371.03(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.46) 
371.02 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON. 
(a)  As used in this section "blind person" or "blind pedestrian" means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees. 
The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is predominately white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip. 
(b)  No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway, street, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry a white metallic cane, with or without a red tip. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.47) 
371.03 - CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE CROSSWALK; DIAGONAL CROSSINGS AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(e)  This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.48) 
371.04 - MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.49) 
371.05 - WALKING ALONG HIGHWAYS. 
(a)  Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
(c)  Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 313.03 and 371.01, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.50) 
371.06 - USE OF HIGHWAY FOR SOLICITING; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES. 
(a)  No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, no person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(2)  Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway, as provided in O.R.C.  4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the Municipality. The permit shall be valid for only one period or time, which shall be specified in the permit, in any calendar year. Council also may specify the locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be conducted that Council considers advisable. 
(3)  As used herein, "charitable organization" means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the "Internal Revenue Code." 
(c)  No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency. 
(d)  No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or ride on the outside of, any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency. 
(e)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the vehicle is traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following applies: 
(1)  The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in O.R.C.  4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled and the person riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; 
(2)  An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or semitrailer. 
(f)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency to ride in the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the tailgate is unlatched. 
(g)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.51) 
371.07 - RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALK. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.441) 
371.08 - YIELDING TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle as stated in Section 331.21, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle. 
(b)  This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.452) 
371.09 - WALKING ON HIGHWAY WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE. 
(a)  A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.481) 
371.10 - ON BRIDGES OR RAILROAD CROSSINGS. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.511) 
371.11 - PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS. 
(a)  Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this Traffic Code, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.491) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.99) 
371.12 - ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES. 
(a)  (1)  Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(b)  No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered vehicles at all times; 
(2)  Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian; 
(3)  Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following: 
A.  A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet; 
B.  A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more; 
(5)  Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path; 
(6)  If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened; 
(7)  If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the immediate care of the person under 16 years of age. 
(c)  No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(d)  No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT-HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS." 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.512) 
(e)  "Electric personal assistive mobility device" means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4501.01(TT)) 
(f)  Whoever violates subsection (b) or (c) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  The offender shall be fined $10.00. 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of OR.C.  4511.512 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing the fine required under subsection (f)(1) hereof, shall do one of the following: 
A.  Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was involved in the current violation of that section. The court shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than $5.00 per day, provided the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or subsequent release shall not exceed $50.00. 
B.  If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to subsection (f)(2)A. hereof, issue an order prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30 days. 
(g)  Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.512) 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
CHAPTER 373 - BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES[14] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
Cross reference- Bicycle defined,  301.04; Motorcycle defined,  301.19; Bicycles prohibited on freeways,  303.06; Motorcycle operator's license required,  335.01(a); Motorcycle headlight,  337.03; Motorcycle brakes,  337.18(b) 
State Law reference- Motorcycle protective equipment, OAC Ch. 4501-17; Motorized bicycle equipment, OAC Ch. 4501-23 

373.01 - CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES. 
(a)  The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a bicycle operator who violates any section of this Traffic Code described in subsection (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle shall not have any points assessed against the person's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under O.R.C.  4510.036. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, in the case of a violation of any section of this Traffic Code described in subsection (a) of this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of this Traffic Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by the Traffic Code for that violation. 
(d)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of Section 333.01 of this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.52) 
(e)  The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to bicycles except those which by their nature are not applicable. 
373.02 - RIDING UPON SEATS; HANDLE BARS; HELMETS AND GLASSES. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "snowmobile" has the same meaning as given that term in O.R.C.  4519.01. 
(b)  No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat. 
No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle. 
No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat other than while sitting upon the seat. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the operator's seat or saddle. 
(c)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator's endorsement or license bearing a "novice" designation that is currently in effect as provided in O.R.C.  4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a United States department of transportation-approved protective helmet on the person's head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with rules adopted by the director of public safety. The provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action. 
(2)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person operating an autocycle or cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants. 
(3)  A.  No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the registrar of motor vehicles pursuant to O.R.C.  4507.05 unless the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person's head a protective helmet that has been approved by the United States department of transportation that conforms with rules adopted by the director. 
B.  No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the registrar pursuant to O.R.C.  4507.05 in any of the following circumstances: 
(i)  At any time when lighted lights are required by O.R.C.  4513.03(A)(1); 
(ii)  While carrying a passenger; 
(iii)  On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is firmly attached to the bicycle. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates subsection (b) or (c)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates subsection (b) or (c)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates subsection (b) or (c)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.53 (later fist version)) 
373.03 - ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE. 
(a)  No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway. This section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.54) 
373.04 - RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES ABREAST. 
(a)  Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.55(B)) 
373.05 - SIGNAL DEVICE ON BICYCLE. 
(a)  A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.56) 
373.06 - LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; BRAKES. 
(a)  Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in Section 337.02, shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front; and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement. 
(2)  A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 
(3)  A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red reflector; 
If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required. 
(b)  Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those required under subsection (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a street or highway. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.56) 
373.07 - RIDING BICYCLE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES; PASSING. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.55(A)) 
373.08 - RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle: 
(1)  Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property; 
(2)  Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle; 
(3)  In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law; 
(4)  Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in Section 373.02(d); 
(5)  At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
373.09 - PARKING OF BICYCLE. 
(a)  No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner so as to unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic or upon a roadway so as to unduly interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
373.10 - MOTORIZED BICYCLE OPERATION, EQUIPMENT AND LICENSE. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in O.R.C.  4511.521, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either a valid commercial driver's license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4506, or a driver's license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4507, or a valid motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in O.R.C.  4511.521, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in O.R.C.  4511.521; 
(2)  The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety and is in proper working order; 
(3)  The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened, and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rear-view mirror; 
(4)  The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles; and 
(5)  The motorized bicycle displays on the rear of such bicycle the current license plate or validation sticker furnished by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under O.R.C.  4503.191. 
(b)  No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person upon the motorized bicycle. 
(c)  Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.521) 
373.11 - PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of the Ohio Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4511.713) 
CHAPTER 375 - SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL PURPOSE VEHICLES[15] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
Cross reference- Street or highway defined,  301.42; Required usage of helmets and safety glasses,  373.02(f) 
State Law reference- Lights, brakes and muffler, OAC Ch. 4501.29; Power of trial court of record to impound registration certificate for certain violations, O.R.C.  4519.47; Power to regulate; municipal licensing prohibited, O.R.C.  4519.48 

375.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Snowmobile means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(A)) 
    All purpose vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. "All-purpose vehicle" does not include a utility vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under O.R.C. Ch. 4503 or Ch. 4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Section 301.20 of this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(B)) 
    Owner means any person, firm or corporation, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle, or other right to the possession thereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(C)) 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all purpose vehicle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(D)) 
    Limited access highway or freeway means a highway especially designed for through traffic and over which abutting property owners have no easement or right of access by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such highway, and access to which may be allowed only at highway intersections designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5511.02) 
    Interstate highway means any part of the interstate system of highways as defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C.A. 103, and amendments thereof. 
    Off-highway motorcycle means every motorcycle, as defined in O.R.C.  4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(I)) 
    Proof of financial responsibility has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4509.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01 (N)) 
    Street or highway has the same meaning as in Section 301.42. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.01(F)) 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
375.02 - EQUIPMENT. 
(a)  Equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles shall include, but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following items: 
(1)  At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness; 
(2)  At least one red taillight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness; 
(3)  Adequate brakes. Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in not more than 40 feet from an initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt. 
(4)  A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the "A" scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970). 
(b)  No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified in subsections (a)(1) and (2) hereof shall not be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all purpose vehicles operated during the daylight hours. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50.00. If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of subsection (b) of this section, whoever violates subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not less than $15.00 nor more than $100.00, imprisoned not more than three days, or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.20) 
375.03 - CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION. 
(a)  The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code apply to the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle as follows: 
(1)  On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and in such manner as the director of public safety designates or except as authorized by Section 375.04; 
(2)  On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area, without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to possession of the property; 
(3)  On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation; 
(4)  On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad; 
(5)  While transporting any firearm, bow, or other implement for hunting, that is not unloaded and securely encased; 
(6)  For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing, or killing any animal or wildfowl; 
(7)  During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted lights as required by Section 375.02. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.40) 
375.04 - PERMITTED OPERATION. 
    Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all purpose vehicles may be operated as follows: 
(1)  To make a crossing of a highway, other than a freeway or limited access highway, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard; 
(2)  On highways in the County or Township road systems whenever the local authority having jurisdiction over such highway so permits; 
(3)  Off and alongside a street or highway for limited distances from the point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be operated. 
(4)  On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as designated in O.R.C.  4519.40(A), when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane; 
(5)  On the berm or shoulder of a county or township road, while traveling from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle to another such area; 
(6)  For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles, on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply: 
A.  The operator has a valid driver's license as required under O.R.C.  4519.44. 
B.  The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules governing safety equipment adopted under O.R.C.  4519.20. 
C.  The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle. 
D.  The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 ,  1, 6, 11-8-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.41) 
375.05 - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR. 
(a)  No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or probationary license issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4506 or 4507, or a valid, current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any street or highway, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any public land or waters. This subsection shall not be construed to permit the holder of such a license to operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle in violation of Section 375.03. 
(b)  No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to such person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age, or older, and who holds a license as provided in subsection (a) hereof, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16 years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.44) 
375.06 - REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES. 
(a)  Except as provided in O.R.C.  4519.02(B), (C) and (D), no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with O.R.C.  4519.03 and 4519.04. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not more than $25.00. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section, whoever violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.02) 
375.07 - ACCIDENT REPORTS. 
(a)  The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100.00 shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and, within 30 days, shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the event that there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports. 
Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by O.R.C.  4519.42 and 4519.43, who investigates or receives information of an accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.46) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
375.08 - CERTIFICATE OF TITLE. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, if such a certificate is required by O.R.C. Ch. 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership information relating to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas; 
(2)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled; 
(3)  Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in O.R.C. Ch. 4519; 
(4)  Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of the court of common pleas as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 4519, in case of the destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title; 
(5)  Violate any provision of O.R.C.  4519.51 to 4519.70 or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those sections; 
(6)  Operate in this Municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4519.66) 
PART FIVE - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE 
CHAPTER 501 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTY[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar State law 
State Law reference- Limitation of prosecution for income tax violations, O.R.C.  718.06; Modification of sentence, O.R.C.  2929.10(C), (D); Penalty considerations, O.R.C.  2929.22; Citation issuance for minor misdemeanors, O.R.C.  2935.26 et seq. 

501.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
(a)  Force means any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any means upon or against a person or thing. 
(b)  Deadly force means any force that carries a substantial risk that it will proximately result in the death of any person. 
(c)  Physical harm to persons means any injury, illness or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
(d)  Physical harm to property means any tangible or intangible damage to property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or enjoyment. "Physical harm to property" does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use. 
(e)  Serious physical harm to persons means any of the following: 
(1)  Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment; 
(2)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(3)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(4)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(5)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
(f)  Serious physical harm to property means any physical harm to property that does either of the following: 
(1)  Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace; 
(2)  Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or substantially interferes with its use and enjoyment for an extended period of time. 
(g)  Risk means a significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
(h)  Substantial risk means a strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
(i)  Offense of violence means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of O.R.C.  2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, 2923.161, 2911.12(A)(1) to (3) or 2919.22(B)(1) to (4), or felonious sexual penetration in violation of former O.R.C.  2907.12; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (i)(1) hereof; 
(3)  An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, committed, purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under subsection (i)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(j)  (1)  Property means any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any interest or license in that property. "Property" includes, but is not limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by a trademark, copyright, or patent. "Financial instruments associated with computers" include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them. 
(2)  As used in this section, "trade secret" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  1333.61, and "telecommunications service" and "information service" have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
(3)  As used in this section, "cable television service," "computer," "computer software," "computer system," "computer network," "data," and "telecommunications device" have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
(k)  Law enforcement officer means any of the following: 
(1)  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under O.R.C.  3735.31(D) or State highway patrol trooper; 
(2)  An officer, agent or employee of the State or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, Charter or ordinance, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of that statutory duty and authority; 
(3)  A mayor or manager in the mayor's or manager's capacity as chief conservator of the peace within the mayor's or manager's municipal corporation; 
(4)  A member of an auxiliary police force organized by county, township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the member's appointment or commission; 
(5)  A person lawfully called pursuant to O.R.C.  311.07 to aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is called; 
(6)  A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to O.R.C.  737.01 as a special patrolling officer during riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the time when the person is appointed; 
(7)  A member of the organized militia of this state or the Armed Forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence; 
(8)  A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret service officer or municipal prosecutor; 
(9)  A veterans' home police officer appointed under O.R.C.  5907.02; 
(10)  A member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority under O.R.C.  306.35(Y); 
(11)  A special police officer employed by a port authority under O.R.C.  4582.04 or 4582.28; 
(12)  The Senate Sergeant of Arms and or Assistant Sergeant at Arms; 
(13)  A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in Section 119.3 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security rules of the transportation security administration of the United States Department of Transportation as provided in Parts 1542 and 1544 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. 
(l)  Privilege means an immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or relationship, or growing out of necessity. 
(m)  Contraband means any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property's involvement in an offense. "Contraband" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  Any controlled substance, as defined in O.R.C.  3719.01, or any device, or paraphernalia; 
(2)  Any unlawful gambling device, or paraphernalia; 
(3)  Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material. 
(n)  A person is "not guilty by reason of insanity" relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the manner specified in O.R.C.  2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the offense, the person did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or defect, the wrongfulness of the person's acts. 
(o)    
(1)  A.  Subject to subsection (o)(2) hereof, as used in any section contained in Part Five-General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense, "person" includes all of the following: 
1.  An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, and association; 
2.  An unborn human who is viable. 
B.  As used in any section contained in Part Five - General Offenses Code that does not set forth a criminal offense, "person" includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and association. 
C.  As used in subsection (o)(1)A. hereof: 
1.  Unborn human means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization until live birth. 
2.  Viable means the stage of development of a human fetus at which there is a realistic possibility of maintaining and nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (o)(1)A. hereof, in no case shall the portion of the definition of the term "person" that is set forth in subsection (o)(1)A.2. hereof be applied or construed in any section contained in Part Five-General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the following manners: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (o)(2)A. hereof, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of O.R.C.  2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21, or 2903.22, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence, but that does violate O.R.C.  2919.12, division (B) of O.R.C.  2919.13, or O.R.C.  2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, may be punished as a violation of O.R.C.  2919.12, division (B) of O.R.C.  2919.13, or O.R.C.  2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this subsection if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with O.R.C.  2919.12. 
B.  In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following: 
1.  Her delivery of a stillborn baby; 
2.  Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying; 
3.  Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable, unborn human; 
4.  Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; 
5.  Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness or other physiological impairment, regardless of its duration or gravity, or a mental illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is carrying. 
(p)  School safety zone consists of a school, school building, school premises, school activity, and school bus. 
(q)  School, school building and school premises have the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2925.01. 
(r)  School activity means any activity held under the auspices of a board of education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community school established under O.R.C. Ch. 3314; a governing body of an educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07. 
(s)  School bus has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.01) 
501.02 - CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES. 
    As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
(a)  Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified. 
(b)  Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty. 
(d)  Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following: 
(1)  For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding $100.00; 
(2)  For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding $150.00, community service under division (D) of O.R.C.  2929.27, or a financial sanction other than a fine under O.R.C.  2929.28. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.02) 
501.03 - COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED. 
(a)  No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the Municipality unless it is defined as an offense in the Codified Ordinances or any other Municipal ordinance. 
(b)  An offense is defined when one or more sections of the Codified Ordinances state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty. 
(c)  This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil judgment or decree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.03) 
501.04 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) hereof, sections of the Codified Ordinances defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed against the Municipality and liberally construed in favor of the accused. 
(b)  Rules of criminal procedure and sections of the Ohio Revised Code providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice. 
(c)  Any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code or of a division of a section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this state, another state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal ordinance. 
(d)  Any provision of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a section, or to a division of a section, of the Codified Ordinances that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this State, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.04) 
501.05 - CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION. 
(a)  A person is subject to misdemeanor prosecution and punishment in this Municipality if any of the following occur: 
(1)  The person commits an offense under the laws of this Municipality, any element of which takes place in this Municipality. 
(2)  While in this Municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this state and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this Municipality, the person conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality or this state and the other jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this Municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy, subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this subsection, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction. 
(3)  While out of this Municipality, the person conspires or attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this Municipality. 
(4)  While out of this Municipality, the person omits to perform a legal duty imposed by the laws of this Municipality, which omission affects a legitimate interest of the Municipality in protecting, governing or regulating any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this Municipality. 
(5)  While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or retained property into this Municipality. 
(6)  While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or entices another and subsequently brings the other person into this Municipality. 
(7)  The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data, image, or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this Municipality in violation of the law of this Municipality. 
(b)  This Municipality includes the land and water within its boundaries and the air space above such land and water, and real property outside the corporate limits, with respect to which this Municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction. Where the boundary between this Municipality and another jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this Municipality for purposes of this section. 
(c)  When an offense is committed under the laws of this Municipality, and it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the offense took place either in this Municipality or in another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place, the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this Municipality for purposes of this section. 
(d)  When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality for an offense committed or completed outside of this Municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this Municipality. 
(e)  Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person. 
(f)  This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with constitutional limitations, to allow this Municipality the broadest possible jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting, this Municipality. 
(g)  For purposes of subsection (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed. 
(h)  As used in this section, "computer," "computer system," "computer network," "information service," "telecommunication," "telecommunications device," "telecommunications service," "data," and "writing" have the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.11) 
501.06 - LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is committed: 
(1)  For misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years; 
(2)  For a minor misdemeanor, six months. 
(b)  If the period of limitation provided in subsection (a) hereof has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person, or by his legal representative who is not himself a party to the offense. 
(c)  (1)  If the period of limitation provided in this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the following offenses during the following specified periods of time: 
A.  For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter; 
B.  For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter. 
(2)  As used in this subsection: 
A.  An "offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant" includes, but is not limited to, a violation of O.R.C.  101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, division (F) or (H) of O.R.C.  102.03, division (A) of O.R.C.  2921.02, division (A) or (B) of O.R.C.  2921.43, or division (F) or (G) of O.R.C.  3517.13, that is directly related to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant. 
B.  "Public servant" has the same meaning as in Section 525.01. 
(d)  An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first. 
(e)  A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation or other process, unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same. 
(f)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus delicti remains undiscovered. 
(g)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused absented himself from this Municipality or concealed his identity or whereabouts is prima-facie evidence of his purpose to avoid prosecution. 
(h)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this State, even though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set aside or reversed on appeal. 
(i)  The period of limitation for a violation of any provision of this General Offenses Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury, disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until either of the following occurs: 
(1)  The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority. 
(2)  A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to have occurred. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.13) 
(j)  This section shall not apply to prosecutions commenced within the period of limitations set forth in O.R.C.  718.12(B) for violations of the Municipal income tax ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
501.07 - REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a person is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person's liability is based on conduct that includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is capable of performing; 
(2)  The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the offense. 
(b)  When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one subsection of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an offense defined in that subsection does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other subsections of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability. 
(c)  (1) When language defining an element of an offense that is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts recklessly. 
(2)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined in the Traffic Code. 
(3)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition incorporated into the offense. 
(d)  Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor's control of the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession. 
(2)  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor's volition, are involuntary acts. 
(3)  "Culpability" means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as defined in Section 501.08. 
(4)  "Intoxication" includes, but is not limited to, intoxication resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.21) 
501.08 - CULPABLE MENTAL STATES. 
(a)  A person acts purposely when it is the person's specific intention to cause a certain result, or when the gist of the offense is a prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender's specific intention to engage in conduct of that nature. 
(b)  A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is aware that the person's conduct will probably cause a certain result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. 
When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact. 
(c)  A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist. 
(d)  A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person's conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances may exist. 
(e)  When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.22) 
501.09 - ATTEMPT. 
(a)  No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense. 
(b)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be. 
(c)  No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense or of complicity in the commission of an offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in violation of this section. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the actor abandoned the actor's effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an offense. An attempt to commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other misdemeanor is a misdemeanor of the next lesser degree than the misdemeanor attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of O.R.C. Ch. 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony under the Ohio Revised Code, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor is not an offense under this section. 
(f)  As used in this section, "drug abuse offense" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2925.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.02) 
501.10 - COMPLICITY. 
(a)  No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Solicit or procure another to commit the offense; 
(2)  Aid or abet another in committing the offense; 
(3)  Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense. 
(b)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender. 
(c)  No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Section 501.09. 
(d)  If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an offense or an offense, the court when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following: 
"The testimony of an accomplice does not become inadmissible because of his complicity, moral turpitude or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect his credibility and make his testimony subject to grave suspicion, and require that it be weighed with great caution. 
"It is for you, as jurors, in the light of all the facts presented to you from the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and worth or its lack of quality and worth." 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor terminated his complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.03) 
501.11 - ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
(a)  An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply. 
(2)  A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply. 
(3)  The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty imposed by law on the organization. 
(4)  If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded, tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board's or person's office or employment. 
(b)  If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the contrary plainly appears. 
(c)  In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense. 
(d)  As used in this section, "organization" means a corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or legal entity. "Organization" does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.23) 
501.12 - PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT. 
(a)  An officer, agent or employee of an organization as defined in Section 501.11 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if he acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the offense, and any of the following apply: 
(1)  In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he has direct responsibility; 
(2)  He has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged. 
(b)  When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he is subject to the same penalty as if he had acted in his own behalf. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2901.24) 
501.13 - CONSPIRACY. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to commit or to promote or facilitate the commission of aggravated murder, murder, kidnapping, abduction, compelling prostitution, promoting prostitution, trafficking in persons, aggravated arson, arson, aggravated robbery, robbery, aggravated burglary, burglary, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity, corrupting another with drugs, a felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, theft of drugs, or illegal processing of drug documents, the commission of a felony offense of unauthorized use of a vehicle, illegally transmitting multiple commercial electronic mail messages or unauthorized access of a computer in violation of O.R.C.  2923.421 or the commission of a violation of any provision of O.R.C. Ch. 3734, other than O.R.C.  3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  With another person or persons, plan or aid in planning the commission of any of the specified offenses; 
(2)  Agree with another person or persons that one or more of them will engage in conduct that facilitates the commission of any of the specified offenses. 
(b)  No person shall be convicted of conspiracy unless a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by the accused or a person with whom the accused conspired, subsequent to the accused's entrance into the conspiracy. For purposes of this section, an overt act is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed. 
(c)  When the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a person with whom the offender conspires also has conspired or is conspiring with another to commit the same offense, the offender is guilty of conspiring with that other person, even though the other person's identity may be unknown to the offender. 
(d)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the conspiracy was impossible under the circumstances. 
(e)  A conspiracy terminates when the offense or offenses that are its objects are committed or when it is abandoned by all conspirators. In the absence of abandonment, it is no defense to a charge under this section that no offense that was the object of the conspiracy was committed. 
(f)  A person who conspires to commit more than one offense is guilty of only one conspiracy, when the offenses are the object of the same agreement or continuous conspiratorial relationship. 
(g)  When a person is convicted of committing or attempting to commit a specific offense or of complicity in the commission of or attempt to commit the specific offense, the person shall not be convicted of conspiracy involving the same offense. 
(h)  (1)  No person shall be convicted of conspiracy upon the testimony of a person with whom the defendant conspired, unsupported by other evidence. 
(2)  If a person with whom the defendant allegedly has conspired testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with conspiracy and if the testimony is supported by other evidence, the court, when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following: 
"The testimony of an accomplice that is supported by other evidence does not become inadmissible because of the accomplice's complicity, moral turpitude, or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect the witness' credibility and make the witness' testimony subject to grave suspicion, and requires that it be weighed with great caution. 
It is for you, as jurors, in light of all the facts presented to you from the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality and worth or its lack of quality and worth". 
(3)  "Conspiracy," as used in subsection (h)(1) of this section, does not include any conspiracy that results in an attempt to commit an offense or in the commission of an offense. 
(i)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge of conspiracy: 
(1)  After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor thwarted the success of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(2)  After conspiring to commit an offense, the actor abandoned the conspiracy prior to the commission of or attempt to commit any offense that was the object of the conspiracy, either by advising all other conspirators of the actor's abandonment, or by informing any law enforcement authority of the existence of the conspiracy and of the actor's participation in the conspiracy. 
(j)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of conspiracy, which is a misdemeanor of the first degree, when the most serious offense that is the object of the conspiracy is a felony of the fifth degree. 
(k)  This section does not define a separate conspiracy offense or penalty where conspiracy is defined as an offense by one or more sections of this Code, other than this section. In such a case, however: 
(1)  With respect to the offense specified as the object of the conspiracy in the other section or sections, subsection (a) hereof defines the voluntary act or acts and culpable mental state necessary to constitute the conspiracy; 
(2)  Subsections (b) to (i) hereof are incorporated by reference in the conspiracy offense defined by the other section or sections of this Code. 
(l)  (1)  In addition to the penalties that otherwise are imposed for conspiracy, a person who is found guilty of conspiracy to engage in a pattern of corrupt activity is subject to divisions (B)(2) and (3) of O.R.C.  2923.32, division (A) of O.R.C.  2981.04 and division (D) of O.R.C.  2981.06. 
(2)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to conspiracy and if the most serious offense that is the object of the conspiracy is a felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense, in addition to the penalties or sanctions that may be imposed for the conspiracy under subsection (j) hereof and O.R.C. Ch. 2929, both of the following apply: 
A.  The provisions of divisions (D), (F) and (G) of O.R.C.  2925.03, division (D) of O.R.C.  2925.04, division (D) of O.R.C.  2925.05, division (D) of O.R.C.  2925.06 and division (E) of O.R.C.  2925.11 that pertain to mandatory and additional fines, driver's or commercial driver's license or permit suspensions, and professionally licensed persons and that would apply under the appropriate provisions of those divisions to a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing, or possession offense that is the most serious offense that is the basis of the conspiracy shall apply to the person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the conspiracy as if the person had been convicted or pleaded guilty to the felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense that is the most serious offense that is the basis of the conspiracy. 
B.  The court that imposes sentence upon the person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to the conspiracy shall comply with the provisions identified as being applicable under subsection (l)(2) of this section, in addition to any other penalty or sanction that it imposes for the conspiracy under subsection (j) of this section and O.R.C. Ch. 2929. 
(m)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Felony drug trafficking, manufacturing, processing or possession offense means any of the following that is a felony: 
A.  A violation of O.R.C.  2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.05, or 2925.06; 
B.  A violation of O.R.C.  2925.11 that is not a minor drug possession offense. 
(2)  Minor drug possession offense has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2925.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.01) 
501.99 - PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANORS. 
(a)  Financial Sanctions. In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to O.R.C.  2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor committed under the Codified Ordinances, including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this section. If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Restitution. Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this section if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim. 
If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from the offender. 
All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under O.R.C.  3937.18. 
If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than five percent of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments. 
The victim or survivor may request that the prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate. 
(2)  Fines. A fine in the following amount: 
A.  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $1,000.00; 
B.  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750.00; 
C.  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500.00; 
D.  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250.00; 
E.  For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.00. 
(3)  Reimbursement of costs of sanctions. 
A.  Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  All or part of the costs of implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee under O.R.C.  2951.021; 
2.  All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined. 
B.  The amount of reimbursement ordered under subsection (a)(3)A. of this section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that subsection. If the court does not order reimbursement under that subsection, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under O.R.C.  2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees specified in O.R.C.  2929.38 in accordance with that section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2929.28(A)) 
(b)  Jail Terms. 
(1)  Except as provided in O.R.C.  2929.22 or 2929.23, and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this General Offenses Code, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the following: 
A.  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days; 
B.  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days; 
C.  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days; 
D.  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days. 
(2)  A.  A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this section may permit the offender to serve the sentenced in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in O.R.C.  2929.26(B). The court retains jurisdiction over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term. 
B.  1.  If a prosecutor, as defined in O.R.C.  2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of the hearing. 
2.  If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the offender from the offender's jail sentence. 
(3)  If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to O.R.C.  5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the offender's participation in the county jail industry program. 
(4)  If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to O.R.C.  307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and O.R.C.  2929.37, both of the following apply: 
A.  The court shall specify both of the following as part of the sentence: 
1.  If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section. 
2.  If the person does not dispute the bill described in subsection (b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in O.R.C.  2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section. 
B.  The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment issued as described in subsection (b)(4)A.2. of this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2929.24) 
(c)  Organizations. Regardless of the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section 501.11 shall be fined, in accordance with this section. The court shall fix the fine as follows: 
Type of Misdemeanor Maximum Fine First degree $5,000.00 Second degree  4,000.00 Third degree  3,000.00 Fourth degree  2,000.00 Minor  1,000.00 Misdemeanor not specifically 
classified  2,000.00 Minor misdemeanor not specifically classified  1,000.00  
(1)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this subsection (c). 
(2)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than the fine that is provided in this subsection (c), then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section defining the offense. 
(3)  This subsection (c) does not prevent the imposition of available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section 501.11, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this subsection (c). 
State Law reference- (O.R.C. 2929.31) 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
CHAPTER 505 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Owner or keeper liable for damages, O.R.C.  951.10; Dog registration - see O.R.C.  955.01 

505.001 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter unless otherwise specifically provided herein: 
(a)  (1)  Dangerous dog means a dog that, without provocation, and subject to subsection (a)(2) hereof has done any of the following: 
A.  Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person; 
B.  Killed another dog; 
C.  Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of Section 505.01(c). 
(2)  Dangerous dog does not include a police dog that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Menacing fashion means that a dog would cause any person being chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to that person. 
(c)  (1)  Subject to subsection (c)(2) hereof, "nuisance dog" means a dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person. 
(2)  Nuisance dog does not include a police dog that while being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of official duties has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person. 
(d)  Police dog means a dog that has been trained, and may be used, to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(e)  Serious injury means any of the following: 
(1)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(2)  Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(3)  Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(4)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
(f)  (1)  Vicious dog means a dog that, without provocation and subject to subsection (f)(2) hereof has killed or caused serious injury to any person. 
(2)  Vicious dog does not include either of the following: 
A.  A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties; 
B.  A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog. 
(g)  Without provocation means that a dog was not teased, tormented or abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to the aid or the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  955.11) 
505.01 - DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE. 
(a)  No person being the owner or having charge of cattle, horses, swine, sheep, geese, ducks, goats, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals shall permit them to run at large upon any public place, or upon any unenclosed lands or upon the premises of another. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  951.02) 
(b)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in heat, unless the dog is properly in leash. 
(c)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to keep it either physically confined or restrained upon the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision or secure enclosure to prevent escape or under reasonable control of some person. 
(d)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any cats shall fail at any time to keep it either physically confined or restrained upon the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision or secure enclosure to prevent escape or under reasonable control of some person. 
(e)  The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places mentioned in this section prima-facie evidence that it is running at large in violation of this section. 
(f)  Whoever violates this subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor in the fourth degree. 
(g)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b), (c), or (d) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsection (f)(1) hereof if the offender is guilty of a violation of subsection (b), (c), or (d) hereof, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that he owns, keeps or harbors to cause that dog to complete obedience training, or to do both. 
(Ord. No. 97-14, 4-1-1997) 
505.011 - ANIMAL CONTROL. 
(a)  No person being the owner or having charge of any dog, cat, or other animal on any public or private property other than the property of the owner or person having charge of such animal shall fail to have in his possession a wood, plastic, or metal device or other container for the purpose of picking up and properly disposing of any fecal matter left by his/her animal. Failure of any such person to have in his possession such suitable device or container is prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-11, 4-1-1997) 
505.02 - IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS. 
(a)  A police officer or animal warden may impound every animal or dog found in violation of Section 505.01. If the dog is not wearing a valid registration tag and the owner is not otherwise reasonably determined, notice shall be posted in the pound or animal shelter both describing the dog and place where seized and advising the unknown owner that unless the dog is redeemed within three days, it may thereafter be sold or destroyed according to law. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or the identity of the owner, keeper or harborer is otherwise reasonably determined, notice shall be given by certified mail to such owner, keeper or harborer that the dog has been impounded and unless redeemed within 14 days of the date of notice, it may thereafter be sold or destroyed according to law. Any dog seized and impounded may be redeemed by its owner, keeper or harborer at any time prior to the applicable redemption period upon payment of all lawful costs assessed against the animal and upon providing the dog with a valid registration tag if it has none. 
(b)  A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the owner's name and address where known, and a statement of any costs assessed against the dog shall be kept by any poundkeeper. 
505.03 - ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF DOGS; TAGS REQUIRED. 
(a)  Except for guide dogs registered under O.R.C.  955.011 and dogs kept by an institution or organization for teaching and research purposes under O.R.C.  955.16, no person shall own, keep or harbor a dog more than three months of age without annually registering such dog with the County Auditor. Failure of any dog at any time to wear a valid registration tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and subject such dog to impounding and disposition as provided by O.R.C.  955.16. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  955.99(D)) 
505.04 - ABANDONING ANIMALS. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall abandon such animal. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.01) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.99) 
505.05 - KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS. 
(a)  No person shall maliciously, or willfully, and without the consent of the owner, kill or injure a farm animal, dog, cat or other domestic animal that is the property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an official capacity, or to trespassing animals as set forth in O.R.C.  959.04. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.02) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section, if the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to less than $300.00, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree; if the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300.00 or more, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.99(B)) 
505.06 - POISONING ANIMALS. 
(a)  No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such capacity, to a farm animal, dog, cat, poultry or other domestic animal that is the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner, place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any of such animals, either upon his own lands or the lands of another. This section does not apply to trespassing animals as set forth in O.R.C.  959.04. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.03) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.99(C)) 
505.07 - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or confine an animal without supplying it during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water; 
(2)  Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during such confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer. This subsection (a)(2) does not apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this section, "shelter" means a man-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree development or vegetation; 
(3)  Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner; 
(4)  Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk; 
(5)  Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28 hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food, water and attention, nor permit such livestock to be so crowded as to overlie, crush, wound or kill each other. 
(b)  Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of time in which such livestock may be detained in any cars or compartments without food, water and attention, may be extended to 36 hours without penalty therefor. This section does not prevent the dehorning of cattle. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.13) 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this subsection, the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.99(D)) 
505.071 - CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Companion animal means any animal that is kept inside a residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept. "Companion animal" does not include livestock or any wild animal. 
(2)  Cruelty, torment and torture have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  1717.01. 
(3)  Residential dwelling means a structure or shelter or the portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a habitation. 
(4)  Practice of veterinary medicine has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4741.01. 
(5)  Wild animal has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  1531.01. 
(6)  Federal Animal Welfare Act means the "Laboratory Animal Act of 1966," Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C.A. 2131 et seq., as amended by the "Animal Welfare Act of 1970," Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the "Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976," Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417 (1976), and the "Food Security Act of 1985," Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended. 
(7)  Dog kennel means an animal rescue for dogs that is registered under O.R.C.  956.06, a boarding kennel or a training kennel. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against a companion animal. 
(c)  No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Commit any act by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal; 
(2)  Omit any act of care by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal; 
(3)  Commit any act of neglect by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal; 
(4)  Needlessly kill the companion animal; 
(5)  Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, or impound or confine the companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation, confinement, or impoundment in any of those specified manners. 
(d)  No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Commit any act by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal; 
(2)  Omit any act of care by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable relief, against the companion animal; 
(3)  Commit any act of neglect by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue, when there is a reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal; 
(4)  Needlessly kill the companion animal; 
(5)  Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, or impound or confine the companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation, confinement, or impoundment or confinement in any of those specified manners. 
(e)  Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related regulations; 
(2)  The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so under O.R.C. Ch. 4741; 
(3)  Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs; 
(4)  The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the training of animals; 
(5)  The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate under O.R.C. Ch. 4741. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.131) 
(f)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  A.  A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section to forfeit to an impounding agency, as defined in O.R.C.  959.132, any or all of the companion animals in that person's ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or place limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any companion animals for a specified or indefinite period of time. 
B.  A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not otherwise paid under O.R.C.  959.132. 
(5)  If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  959.99) 
505.08 - NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the Municipality so as to create noxious, or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
505.09 - BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS. 
(a)  No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Municipality which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the Municipality. Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which he occupies or owns, shall be considered as harboring such dog. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
505.10 - ANIMAL BITES; REPORTS AND QUARANTINE. 
(a)  Whenever any person is bitten by a dog or other animal, report of such bite shall be made to the Health Commissioner within 24 hours. Whenever it is reported to the Health Commissioner that any dog or cat has bitten a person, that dog or cat shall be quarantined under an order issued by the Health Commissioner. The dog or cat shall be quarantined by its owner or by a harborer, or shall be quarantined in a pound or kennel. In all cases, such quarantine shall be under the supervision of the Health Commissioner and shall be at the expense of the owner or harborer. Quarantine shall continue until the Health Commissioner determines that the dog or cat is not afflicted with rabies. The quarantine period hereby required shall not be less than ten days from the date on which the person was bitten. If at any time during the quarantine, the Health Commissioner requires the dog or cat to be examined for symptoms of rabies, then the examination shall be by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine. The veterinarian shall report to the Health Commissioner the conclusions reached as a result of the examinations. The examination by a veterinarian shall be at the expense of the owner or harborer. No dog or cat shall be released from the required quarantine unless and until it has been properly vaccinated against rabies. 
No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section or with any order of the Health Commissioner made pursuant thereto, nor fail to immediately report to the Health Commissioner any symptoms or behavior suggestive of rabies. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
505.11 - HUNTING PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of firearms, bow and arrow, air rifle or any other means within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this section do not apply to the use of any trap specifically designed to kill rats, mice or moles with the consent of the owner or occupant of the real property where the trap is set. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to any person authorized by the Chief of Police while participating in a City authorized animal control program. 
(3)  The provisions of this section do not apply to licensed and bonded wildlife removal and control services that residents privately contract to trap nuisance animals on their property. Wildlife removal and control services shall only use humane methods/traps that are not dangerous to the life or limb of animals to be trapped, or any persons who have any possibility of coming into contact with such traps. Any use of firearms is strictly prohibited. Nuisance animals shall mean wild animals that either cause property damage or threaten public health and safety, and shall not be constructed to include domesticated animals. Licensed and bonded wildlife removal and control services that are contracted by residents must notify the Police Department of the name of the property owner, the address of the property upon which trapping will take place, the nuisance animal being trapped, and the type and number of traps being set on said property prior to setting any such trap. Wildlife removal and control services shall keep current records on animals destroyed and are required to produce said records on demand by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-95, 9-18-2007) 
505.12 - COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY. 
(a)  No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry, including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or poultry which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less than six. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  925.62) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
505.13 - DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS AND RESTRICTED SNAKES. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "dangerous wild animal" and "restricted snake" have the same meanings as set forth in O.R.C.  935.01. 
(b)  (1)  Except for a restricted snake specified in O.R.C.  935.01(L)(1), no person shall sell or offer for sale at auction a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake. 
(2)  Except for a microchip removed for purposes of a medical emergency by a veterinarian that is qualified to provide veterinary care to the dangerous wild animal, no person shall knowingly remove a microchip that is implanted in a dangerous wild animal as required in O.R.C.  935.04. 
(3)  No person that possesses a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake shall fail to post and display any of the following: 
A.  On each cage in which a dangerous wild animal is confined, signs warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is confined in the cage; 
B.  At each entrance to the property where a dangerous wild animal is confined, a sign warning the public that a dangerous wild animal is on the property; 
C.  On each container in which a restricted snake is confined, a sign warning the public that a restricted snake is in the container; 
D.  At the main entrance to each structure where a restricted snake is confined, a sign warning the public that a restricted snake is in the structure; 
E.  On a vehicle that is used to transport a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, a sign warning that a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, as applicable, is in the vehicle. 
The signs shall comply with standards established in rules adopted by the State Director of Agriculture. 
(4)  No person shall allow a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake to roam off the property where it is confined. 
(5)  No person shall remove any teeth or claws from a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, as applicable, unless determined to be medically necessary by a veterinarian. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  935.18) 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense. On a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  935.99) 
505.14 - DANGEROUS DOGS. 
(a)  Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do either of the following: 
(1)  While that dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, securely confine it at all times in a building, in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
(2)  While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following: 
A.  Keep that dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
B.  Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the ground or stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; 
C.  Muzzle that dog. 
(b)  No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the following: 
(1)  Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, County Dog Warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section; 
(2)  Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County Auditor pursuant to O.R.C.  955.22(I), affix a tag that identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog's collar, and ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times; 
(3)  Notify the local Dog Warden immediately if any of the following occurs: 
A.  The dog is loose or unconfined. 
B.  The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property. 
C.  The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property of the owner of the dog. 
(4)  If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer or death. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  955.22) 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to subsection (b) hereof. The court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the Dog Warden or the humane society at the owner's expense. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b)(2) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsections (b)(1), (3) or (4) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  955.99) 
505.15 - WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply for this section. 
(1)  Wild animal means any warm-blooded nondomestic animal which is indigenous to the State of Ohio and capable of transmitting rabies. 
(2)  Pocket pet means small pets such as hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, domestic rabbits, mice, etc. 
(3)  Exotic animal means all nondomestic animals not indigenous to the State of Ohio, whether warm- or cold-blooded, plus all poisonous fish and reptiles. 
(b)  No person shall keep, maintain, or have in his possession or control, within the corporation limits of the City, unless properly caged or housed, any wild or exotic animals as defined in subsection (a) hereof. This section does not apply to "pocket pets." 
(c)  Before bringing any wild or exotic animals as defined in subsection (a) hereof into the City, the person so doing shall first construct, purchase, or obtain a cage or other structure to confine the wild or exotic animal. Further before bringing the wild or exotic animal into the City limits, the cage, pen, tank, aquarium, or other housing shall first be inspected by the Zoning Inspector. The cage, pen, tank, aquarium or other housing shall be so constructed so as to assure that the wild or exotic animal will not escape nor will unauthorized persons be able to enter. A cage, pen, tank, aquarium or other housing containing such wild or exotic animals shall be enclosed on all sides and the top, with a gate locked with a padlock or other locking device requiring a key to open. The bottom of the cage, pen, tank, aquarium, or other housing shall be constructed of concrete, blacktop, or other material sufficient to prevent the animal from digging himself out of the enclosure. The person intending to have one of the animals classified as wild or exotic by this section located within the City limits shall do so only upon receiving written approval of the Zoning Inspector. 
(d)  The wild or exotic animal shall not be removed from the enclosure, except if it is going to be permanently removed from the City limits or for purposes of veterinary treatment. If another wild or exotic animal is intended to be housed in the same structure which was previously approved, approval must first be obtained from the Zoning Inspector prior to bringing the wild or exotic animal into the City. 
(e)  An inspection fee of $50.00 will be paid to the Zoning Inspector when the Inspector is contacted to inspect the cage, pen, tank, aquarium or other housing, as required by this section. In addition, an annual inspection fee of $25.00 will be paid to the City through the Zoning Inspector on or before January 5, of each calendar year. 
(f)  Before any of the wild or exotic animals as defined by subsection (a) hereof are brought into the City, the owner, keeper, or harborer of such wild or exotic animal, in addition to the above requirements, shall procure personal liability and property damage liability insurance and have evidence of the same posted with the City by having the same filed with the Zoning Inspector. The liability insurance shall provide minimum coverage of $250,000.00 per occurrence and shall contain a provision of commitment from the insurer that the City will be notified if the coverage is cancelled or in any other way should lapse. Upon notification to the City through the appropriate channels that liability coverage has lapsed, the City will contact the insured, through the Zoning Inspector, Chief of Police, Clerk of Council, Solicitor, or other elected official, and notify the insured he has three business days in which to procure new liability coverage in the same minimum amounts and that failure to do so will mean an automatic revocation of consent to keep, maintain, possess, or control the wild or exotic animal, plus subjection to prosecution for violation of this section. 
(g)  Commercial exhibitors who have complied with the rules and licensing requirements established by the United States Department of Agriculture are exempt for this section. 
(h)  Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.00. Each day that the violation continues shall be treated as a separate offense. If a person has been previously convicted of a violation of this section, the subsequent violation shall constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 84-33, 9-4-1984) 
505.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 509 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND PEACE DISTURBANCE[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Criminal trespass,  541.05 
State Law reference- Use of force to suppress riot, O.R.C.  2917.05; Cordoning off riot areas, prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, O.R.C.  3761.16; Emergency suspension of permits and sales by Director of Liquor Control, O.R.C.  4301.251 

509.01 - RIOT. 
(a)  No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of Section 509.03: 
(1)  With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct; 
(2)  With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct a function of government; 
(3)  With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such institution. 
(b)  No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might otherwise be lawful. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.03) 
509.011 - INCITING TO VIOLENCE. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite another to commit any offense of violence, when either of the following apply: 
(1)  The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and present danger that any offense of violence will be committed; 
(2)  The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of violence. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.01) 
509.02 - FAILURE TO DISPERSE. 
(a)  Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of Section 509.03, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public official may order the participants and such other persons to disperse. No person shall knowingly fail to obey such order. 
(b)  Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) hereof, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the failure to obey the order described in subsection (a) hereof, creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.04) 
509.03 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT; INTOXICATION. 
(a)  No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to another by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property, or in violent or turbulent behavior; 
(2)  Making unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person, which by its very utterance or usage inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(3)  Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response; 
(4)  Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street, road, highway or right of way, or to, from, within or upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; 
(5)  Creating a condition which is physically offensive to persons or which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender. 
(b)  No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the following: 
(1)  In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on others; 
(2)  Engage in conduct or create a condition which presents a risk of physical harm to himself or another, or to the property of another. 
(c)  Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation of subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is probable cause to believe that person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes of subsection (b) hereof. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (e)(3), disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of the following applies: 
A.  The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist. 
B.  The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a school safety zone. 
C.  The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind. 
D.  The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of "emergency medical services personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2133.21. 
(2)  Emergency facility person is the singular of "emergency facility personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2909.04. 
(3)  Emergency facility has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2909.04. 
(4)  Committed in the vicinity of a school has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2925.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.11) 
509.04 - DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of such meeting, procession or gathering; 
(2)  Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the sensibilities of the group. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.12) 
509.05 - MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or other authorized person, engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind; 
(2)  Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news media representative's duties. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of "emergency medical services personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2133.21. 
(2)  Emergency facility person is the singular of "emergency facility personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2909.04. 
(3)  Emergency facility has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2909.04. 
509.06 - INDUCING PANIC. 
(a)  No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that such report or warning is false; 
(2)  Threatening to commit any offense of violence; 
(3)  Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm. 
(b)  Division (a) hereof does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If inducing panic results in physical harm to any person, economic harm of $1,000.00 or more, if the public place involved in a violation of this section is a school or an institution of higher education, or if the violation pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Economic harm means any of the following: 
A.  All direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct. "Economic harm" as described in this division includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
1.  All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct; 
2.  The cost of all wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct; 
3.  The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; 
4.  The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct. 
B.  All costs incurred by the Municipality as a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted the violation of this section or Section 509.07, including, but not limited to, all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision. 
(2)  School means any school operated by a board of education or any school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of this section is committed. 
(3)  Weapon of mass destruction means any of the following: 
A.  Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their precursors; 
B.  Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent; 
C.  Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life; 
D.  Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of "destructive device" pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that section: 
1.  Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar device; 
2.  Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division (e)(3)D.1. of this section and from which an item or device described in that division may be readily assembled. 
(4)  Biological agent has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2917.33. 
(5)  Emergency medical services personnel has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2133.21. 
(6)  Institution of higher education means any of the following: 
A.  A state university or college as defined in O.R.C.  3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or technical college; 
B.  A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 1713. 
C.  A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools under O.R.C. Ch. 3332. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.31) 
509.07 - MAKING FALSE ALARMS. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm; 
(2)  Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other incident within its concern, knowing that such offense did not occur. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000.00 or more, or if a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections. 
(e)  As used in this section, "economic harm" and "weapon of mass destruction" have the same meanings as in Section 509.06. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.32) 
509.08 - CURFEW. 
(a)  Minors Under Twelve. No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places during the period of sunset to sunrise. However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  Minors Under Eighteen. No minor under the age of 18 shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. of the following day. However the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(c)  Responsibility of Parent or Guardian. No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal custody and control of any minor shall knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Responsibility of Business Operators. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment, or any other business, shall permit any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, loaf, or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by subsections (a) or (b) hereof. 
Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or other place or business, finds in such place of business, any person under the age of 18 years loitering, loafing, or idling, he shall immediately order such person to leave. If such person refuses to leave such place of business, the operator shall immediately notify the Police Department or the Delaware County Sheriff of the violation. 
(e)  Penalty. 
(1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be dealth with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsections (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 81-14, 10-6-1981) 
509.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 513 - DRUG ABUSE CONTROL[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Adulterating food with drug of abuse,  537.13; Using weapons while under the influence,  549.03 
State Law reference- Federal prosecution bar to local prosecution, O.R.C.  2925.50, 3719.19; Analysis report and notarized statement as evidence, O.R.C.  2925.51; Criteria for granting probation, O.R.C.  3719.70(B) 

513.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    Administer means the direct application of a drug, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion or any other means to a person or an animal. 
    Controlled substance means a drug, compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V. 
    Dispense means sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver. 
    Distribute means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver but does not include administering or dispensing a drug. 
    Hypodermic means a hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or device for the injection of medication. 
    Manufacturer means a person who manufactures a controlled substance as "manufacture" is defined in O.R.C.  3715.01. 
    Except as provided in subsection (1) hereof: 
    Marihuana means all parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. "Marihuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.01) 
(1)  Marihuana does not include hashish. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.01) 
    Controlled substance analog has the same meaning as provided in O.R.C.  3719.01. 
    Official written order means an order written on a form provided for that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision for the order, if the order forms are authorized and required by Federal law. 
    Pharmacist means a person licensed under O.R.C. Ch. 4729 to engage in the practice of pharmacy. 
    Pharmacy has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
    Poison means any drug, chemical, or preparation likely to be deleterious or destructive to adult human life in quantities of four grams or less. 
    Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, prescriber and prescription have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
    Sale includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer or gift, or offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
    Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV and Schedule V mean controlled substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V respectively, established pursuant to O.R.C.  3719.41, as amended pursuant to O.R.C.  3719.43 or 3719.44. 
    Wholesaler means a person who, on official written orders other than prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes a "wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs" as defined in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.01) 
    Drug of abuse means any controlled substance as defined in subsection (b) hereof, any harmful intoxicant as defined in subsection (x) hereof and any dangerous drug as defined in subsection (r) hereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.011) 
    Dangerous drug means any of the following: 
(1)  Any drug to which either of the following applies: 
A.  Under the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, the drug is required to bear a label containing the legend "Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without prescription" or "Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian" or any similar restrictive statement, or the drug may be dispensed only upon a prescription; 
B.  Under O.R.C. ch. 3715 or 3719, the drug may be dispensed only upon a prescription. 
(2)  Any drug that contains a Schedule V narcotic drug and that is exempt from O.R.C. ch. 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply; 
(3)  Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human body other than through a natural orifice of the human body. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4729.02) 
    Bulk amount of a controlled substance means any of the following: 
(1)  For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of controlled substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, and hashish and except as provided in subsection (2) or (5) hereof, whichever of the following is applicable: 
A.  An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative; 
B.  An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium; 
C.  An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol, or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant; 
D.  An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium derivative; 
E.  An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of phencyclidine; 
F.  An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws as defined in O.R.C.  3719.01, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance; 
G.  An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Federal Drug Abuse Control laws; 
(2)  An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative; 
(3)  An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative; 
(4)  An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule V substance. 
(5)  An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid. 
    Unit dose means an amount or unit of a compound, mixture or preparation containing a controlled substance, that is separately identifiable and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual. 
    Cultivate includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling. 
    Drug abuse offense means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of O.R.C.  2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04-2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37; or a violation of O.R.C.  2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former law of this or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (1) hereof; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former law of this or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing or attempting to commit any offense under subsection (1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
    Felony drug abuse offense means any drug abuse offense that would constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United States. 
    Harmful intoxicant does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means any of the following: 
(1)  Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
A.  Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent; 
B.  Any aerosol propellant; 
C.  Any fluorocarbon refrigerant; 
D.  Any anesthetic gas. 
(2)  Gamma Butyrolactone; 
(3)  1,4 Butanediol. 
    Manufacture means to plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug by propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to production. 
    Possess or possession means having control over a thing or substance but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found. 
    Sample drug means a drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a manufacturer. 
    Standard pharmaceutical reference manual means the current edition, with cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board of Pharmacy. 
    Juvenile means a person under 18 years of age. 
    School means any school operated by a board of education or any school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School premises means either of the following: 
(1)  The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense is committed; 
(2)  Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a school or the governing body of a school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School building means any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    Counterfeit controlled substance means: 
(1)  Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of the owner of rights to that trademark, trade name or identifying mark; or 
(2)  Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it; or 
(3)  Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance; or 
(4)  Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in shape, size and color, or its marking, labeling, packaging, distribution or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale. 
    An offense is committed in the vicinity of a school if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school premises. 
    An offense is committed in the vicinity of a juvenile if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense. 
    Hashish means the resin or a preparation of the resin contained in marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form. 
    Public premises means any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort. 
    Methamphetamine means methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine. 
    Lawful prescription means a prescription that is issued for a legitimate medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of deception or by the commission of any theft offense. 
    Deception and theft offense have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.01) 
513.02 - GIFT OF MARIHUANA. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly give or offer to make a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of trafficking in marihuana. Trafficking in marihuana is a minor misdemeanor for the first offense and, for any subsequent offense, it is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(c)  The court may suspend for not less than six months or more than five years the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to any violation of this section. If an offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit is suspended pursuant to this subsection, the offender, at any time after the expiration of two years from the day on which the offender's sentence was imposed, may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting termination of the suspension; upon the filing of such a motion and the court's finding of good cause for the termination, the court may terminate the suspension. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.03(C)(3)(h)) 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, , 10-17-2017) 
513.03 - DRUG ABUSE; CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POSSESSION OR USE. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog. 
(b)  This section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with O.R.C. chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. 
(2)  If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; 
(3)  Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act; 
(4)  Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of one of the following: 
(1)  If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of drugs. Possession of drugs is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the bulk amount. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of marihuana. Possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed 200 grams. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2)B. hereof, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor. 
B.  If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of hashish. Possession of hashish is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does not exceed the maximum amount specified in subsection (c)(3)B. hereof. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3)B. hereof, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor. 
B.  If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction that is imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not less than six months or more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. 
(e)  Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person's appearance as a witness. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.11) 
513.04 - POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument, article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use. 
(b)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with O.R.C. chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not less than six months or more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.12) 
513.05 - PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE. 
(a)  No person, who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4501.01(A), shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense. 
(b)  No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody, control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land, shall knowingly permit the premises, or real estate, including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another person. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the felony drug abuse offense in question is a violation of O.R.C.  2925.02 or 2925.03, permitting drug abuse is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for not more than five ears the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offended pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(e)  Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation of subsection (b) hereof constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to O.R.C. ch. 3767. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.13(A)-(D),(F)) 
513.06 - ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any person listed in O.R.C.  2925.03(B)(1)-(3) to the extent and under the circumstances described in those divisions. 
(c)  Whoever commits a violation of subsection (a) hereof is guilty of illegal cultivation of marihuana. Illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of marihuana involved does not exceed 200 grams. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) hereof, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor, or if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(d)  (1)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for no more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial drier's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(2)  Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section prior to the effective date o this amendment may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender's license r permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a motion. 
Upon the filing of a motion under subsection (d)(2) of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension. 
(e)  Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in an application for employment, a license, or any other right or privilege or made in connection with the person's appearance as a witness. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.04) 
513.07 - POSSESSING OR USING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS. 
(a)  Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony of the fifth degree. 
(c)  (1)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with O.R.C.  2925.38. 
(2)  Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section prior to the effective date of this amendment may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a motion. 
Upon the filing of a motion under subsection (c)(2) of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.31) 
513.08 - ILLEGALLY DISPENSING DRUG SAMPLES. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly furnish another a sample drug. 
(b)  Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with O.R.C. chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of drug samples. If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) hereof, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(2)  If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for an offense under this section, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.36) 
513.09 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS. 
(a)  No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed by a manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist or licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs who dispenses a controlled substance in a package or container, as long as any of the original contents remain, except when lawfully filling a prescription. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.08) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, O.R.C.  3719.07 or 3719.08 or a drug abuse offense, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.99) 
513.10 - HYPODERMIC POSSESSION, DISPLAY AND DISPENSING. 
(a)  Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following: 
(1)  A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent or employee of that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business; 
(2)  Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of business; 
(3)  A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course of the person's profession or employment; 
(4)  A person, when the hypodermic was lawfully obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs; 
(5)  A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical, educational or medicinal purposes; 
(6)  A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal; 
(7)  A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional, mechanical, trade or craft purposes. 
(b)  No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees, and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft or acquisition by any unauthorized person. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.172) 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, O.R.C.  3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B) or (E), or 3719.31 or a drug abuse offense, a violation is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3719.99) 
513.11 - HARMFUL INTOXICANTS; POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  As used in this section, "motor vehicle," "street" and "highway" have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
(b)  Unless authorized under O.R.C. chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731, 4741 or 4765, no person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking; 
(2)  While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(d)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.33) 
513.12 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. 
(a)  As used in this section, "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the offender for use or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter or O.R.C. ch. 2925. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment, products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use or designated by the offender for use, in any of the following manners: 
(1)  A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance; 
(3)  Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine; 
(4)  An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species of a plant that is a controlled substance; 
(5)  Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, a controlled substance; 
(6)  A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled substance; 
(7)  A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance; 
(8)  A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana; 
(9)  A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding a controlled substance; 
(10)  A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small quantities of a controlled substance; 
(11)  A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled substance; 
(12)  A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body; 
(13)  An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller. 
(b)  In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Any statement by the owner, or by anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, concerning its use; 
(2)  The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or O.R.C. ch. 2925; 
(3)  The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any controlled substance; 
(4)  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the equipment, product or material; 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any person whom the owner or person in control of the equipment, product or material knows intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or O.R.C. ch. 2925. A finding that the owner, or anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter or O.R.C. ch. 2925, does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(6)  Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment, product or material concerning its use; 
(7)  Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or material and explaining or depicting its use; 
(8)  National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment, product or material; 
(9)  The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or material is displayed for sale; 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment, product or material in the community; 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or material. 
(c)  (1)  Subject to subsection (d)(2) of this section, no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if the person knows or reasonably should know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug paraphernalia. 
(3)  No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates primarily within this state, if the person knows that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in the state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(d)  (1)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with O.R.C. chs. 3719, 4715, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Section 513.10. 
(2)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person's use, or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana. 
(e)  Notwithstanding O.R.C. ch. 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized, after a conviction for that violation shall be forfeited, and upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to O.R.C.  2981.12. 
(f)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (c)(1) hereof is guilty of illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (f)(3) hereof, whoever violates subsection (c)(2) hereof is guilty of dealing in drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (c)(2) hereof by selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  Whoever violates subsection (c)(3) hereof is guilty of illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(g)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.14) 
513.121 - MARIHUANA DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. 
(a)  As used in this section, "drug paraphernalia" has the same meaning as in Section 513.12. 
(b)  In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in subsection (b) of Section 513.12. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana. 
(d)  This section does not apply to any person identified in subsection (d)(1) of Section 513.12 and it shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Section 513.10. 
(e)  Subsection (e) of Section 513.12 applies with respect to any drug paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section. 
(f)  Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor. 
(g)  In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the court shall suspend for more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with O.R.C.  2925.38. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.141) 
513.13 - COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled substance. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.37(A), (G)) 
513.14 - OFFENDER MAY BE REQUIRED TO PAY FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTS. 
    In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under O.R.C.  2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under O.R.C.  2925.51, or in any other manner on any substance that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. 
    The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.511) 
513.15 - IMMUNITY FOR ADMINISTERING OR PROVIDING EPINEPHRINE. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Administer epinephrine" means to inject an individual with epinephrine using an auto injector in a manufactured dosage form. 
(2)  "Prescriber" and "qualified entity" have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  3728.01. 
(b)  An individual or qualified entity is not subject to criminal prosecution for a violation of O.R.C.  4731.41 or criminal prosecution under this chapter if the individual or entity, acting in good faith and in accordance with O.R.C. ch 3728, administers epinephrine or provides an epinephrine auto injector to an individual who appears to be experiencing or at risk of experiencing anaphylaxis or to the parent, guardian, or custodian of such an individual. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2925.64) 
513.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 517 - GAMBLING[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Contributing to delinquency of minors, O.R.C.  2151.41; Search warrants O.R.C.  2933.21(E); Licensing charitable bingo games, O.R.C.  2915.08 
State Constitution reference- Lotteries prohibited; exception, Ohio Const., Art. XV, Sec. 6 

517.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(a)  Bookmaking means the business of receiving or paying off bets. 
(b)  Bet means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event, undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk. 
(c)  Scheme of chance means a slot machine unless authorized under O.R.C. Ch. 3772, lottery unless authorized under O.R.C. Ch. 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participate gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. "Scheme of chance" includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a prize in the following instances: 
(1)  Less than 50 percent of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at any one location; 
(2)  Less than 50 percent of participants who purchase goods or services at any one location do not accept, use or redeem the goods or services sold or purportely sold; 
(3)  More than 50 percent of prizes at any one location are revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a "casino game" as defined in O.R.C.  3772.01; 
(4)  The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised; 
(5)  A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more game entries; 
(6)  A participant may use the electronic device to purchase additional game entries; 
(7)  A participant may purchase additional game entries by using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device; 
(8)  A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20 percent of the gross revenue received at one location; or 
(9)  A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device. 
As used in this subsection, "electronic device" means a mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors. 
(d)  Game of chance means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo. 
(e)  Game of chance conducted for profit means any game of chance designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not include bingo. 
(f)  Gambling device means any of the following: 
(1)  A book, totalizer or other equipment for recording bets; 
(2)  A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet; 
(3)  A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance; 
(4)  Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially designed for gambling purposes; 
(5)  Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Gambling offense means the following: 
(1)  A violation of O.R.C.  2915.02-2915.092, 2915.10 or 2915.11; 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (g)(1) hereof or a violation of O.R.C.  2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, of which gambling is an element; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing an offense under subsection (g)(1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, charitable organization means either of the following: 
(1)  An organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter's organization, veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal, income taxation under subsection 501(c)(4), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have been in continuous existence as such in this State for a period of two years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license under O.R.C.  2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in division (D) of O.R.C.  2915.02. 
(i)  Religious organization means any church, body of communicants or group that is not organized or operated for profit, that gathers in common membership for regular worship and religious observances. 
(j)  Veteran's organization means any individual post or state headquarters of a national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a national veteran's association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran's association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with the national veteran's association or has received a letter from the national veteran's association indicating that the state headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran's association. As used in this subsection, "national veteran's association" means any veteran's association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons. 
(k)  Volunteer firefighter's organization means any organization of volunteer firefighters, as defined in O.R.C.  146.01, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county, municipal corporation, or township. 
(l)  Fraternal organization means any society, order, state headquarters, or association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business of sodality of its members. 
(m)  Volunteer rescue service organization means any organization of volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization as defined in O.R.C.  4765.01. 
(n)  Charitable bingo game means any bingo game described in subsection (o)(1) or (2) of this section that is conducted by a charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose. 
(o)  Bingo means either of the following: 
(1)  A game with all of the following characteristics: 
A.  The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into 25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space. 
B.  The participants cover the space on the bingo cards or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a bingo game operator. 
C.  A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance, either manually or mechanically from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets. 
D.  The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and numbers as described in subsection (o)(1)C. hereof, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by a participant. 
(2)  Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles. 
(p)  Conduct means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a sweepstakes. 
(q)  Bingo game operator means any person, except security personnel, who performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but not limited to, collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. 
(r)  Participant means any person who plays bingo. 
(s)  Bingo session means a period that includes both of the following: 
(1)  Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more games described in subsection (o)(1) of this section, instant bingo, and seal cards; 
(2)  A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period described in subsection (s)(1) of this section. 
(t)  Gross receipts means all money or assets, including admission fees, that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. "Gross receipts" does not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply: 
(1)  The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years prior to conducting bingo. 
(2)  The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the purchase of that food or beverage. 
(3)  The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices. 
(u)  Security personnel includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or a police officer of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a peace officer's training course pursuant to O.R.C.  109.71-109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted. 
(v)  Charitable purpose means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to, any of the following: 
(1)  Any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any of its possessions, at least 75 percent of the members of which are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in division (B)(12) of O.R.C.  5739.02, is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in division (B)(12) of O.R.C.  5739.02, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief; 
(3)  A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals if contributions for such use would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under subsection 170 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(4)  A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net profit for the purposes set forth in subsection (k) of this section. 
(w)  Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as now or hereafter amended. 
(x)  Youth athletic organization means any organization, not organized for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association. 
(y)  Youth athletic park organization means any organization, not organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following: 
(1)  It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of the following: 
A.  The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for athletic activities by one or more organizations not organized for profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or association; 
B.  The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at any time during the year, 
(2)  It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the operation, maintenance and improvement of its playing fields of the type described in paragraph (1) hereof. 
(z)  Bingo supplies means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are "bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "bingo supplies" are not to be considered equipment used to conduct a bingo game. 
(aa)  Instant bingo means a form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card or bingo blower. In all "instant bingo" the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. "Instant bingo" does not include any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations. 
(bb)  Seal card means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols. 
(cc)  Raffle means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. "Raffle" does not include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and 
(2)  The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away. 
(dd)  Punch board means a board containing a number of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number. 
(ee)  Gross profit means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the payment of prize awards. 
(ff)  Net profit means gross profit minus expenses. 
(gg)  Expenses means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of the following: 
(1)  The purchase or lease of bingo supplies; 
(2)  The annual license fee required under O.R.C.  2915.08; 
(3)  Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account described in O.R.C.  2915.10; 
(4)  Audits and accounting services; 
(5)  Safes; 
(6)  Cash registers; 
(7)  Hiring security personnel; 
(8)  Advertising bingo; 
(9)  Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session; 
(10)  Tables and chairs; 
(11)  Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization's facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen; 
(12)  Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted; 
(13)  Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under division (B)(1) of O.R.C.  2915.08. 
(hh)  Person has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  1.59 and includes any firm or any other legal entity, however organized. 
(ii)  Revoke means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under O.R.C.  2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(jj)  Suspend means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under O.R.C.  2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(kk)  Distributor means any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does either of the following: 
(1)  Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state; 
(2)  Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state. 
(ll)  Manufacturer means any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale. 
(mm)  Gross annual revenues means the annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (o)(1) of this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (o)(2) of this section. 
(nn)  Instant bingo ticket dispenser means a mechanical device that dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has the following characteristics: 
(1)  It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency. 
(2)  It performs no gaming functions. 
(3)  It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise. 
(4)  It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations. 
(5)  It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels. 
(6)  It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or card is a winning or nonwinning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator. 
(7)  It may provide accounting and security features to aid in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses. 
(8)  It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive. 
(oo)  (1)  Electronic bingo aid means an electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all of the following: 
A.  It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller. 
B.  It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device. 
C.  It identifies a winning bingo pattern. 
(2)  Electronic bingo aid does not include any device into which a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play. 
(pp)  Deal of instant bingo tickets means a single game of instant bingo tickets all with the same serial number. 
(qq)  (1)  Slot machine means either of the following: 
A.  Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain; 
B.  Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance. 
(2)  Slot machine does not include a skill-based amusement machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser. 
(rr)  Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo means gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo conducted by a veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real property taxes, and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo is conducted. 
(ss)  Charitable instant bingo organization means an organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A "charitable instant bingo organization" does not include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.13. 
(tt)  Game flare means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following information for the game: 
(1)  The name of the game; 
(2)  The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo; 
(3)  The form number; 
(4)  The ticket count; 
(5)  The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets; 
(6)  The cost per play; 
(7)  The serial number of the game. 
(uu)  (1)  Skill-based amusement machine means mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply: 
A.  The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10.00; 
B.  Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than $10.00; 
C.  Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.00 times the fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that prize; and 
D.  Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play. 
A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for purposes of division (uu)(1) of this section even if the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based amusement machine. 
(2)  A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the following apply: 
A.  The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game. 
B.  Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the player's score; 
C.  The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a source other than any player playing the game. 
D.  The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions. 
E.  The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by game features not visible or known to the player. 
F.  The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise. 
(3)  All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as described in subsection (uu)(1) of this section: 
A.  As used in subsection (uu) of this section, "game" and "play" mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play. 
B.  Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single noncontest, competition or tournament play. 
C.  To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition or tournament. 
(4)  For purposes of subsection (uu)(1) of this section, the mere presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine. 
(vv)  Merchandise prize means any item of value, but shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof; 
(2)  Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant bingo; 
(3)  Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or 
(4)  A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed in subsection (vv)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(ww)  Redeemable voucher means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash representation of value. 
(xx)  Pool not conducted for profit means a scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants. 
(yy)  Sporting organization means a hunting, fishing or trapping organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization, including but not limited to, the league of Ohio sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three years. 
(zz)  Community action agency has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  122.66. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.01) 
(aaa)   (1)  Sweepstakes terminal device means a mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes, or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply: 
A.  The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries. 
B.  The device utilizes software such that the simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize. 
C.  The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of entries. 
D.  The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry. 
E.  The device predetermines the prize results and stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed. 
F.  The device utilizes software to create a game result. 
G.  The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize awarded. 
H.  The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered. 
(2)  As used in this subsection and in Section 517.02: 
A.  Enter means the act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes. 
B.  Entry means one event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes terminal device until all of the sweepstakes prize results from that activation are revealed. 
C.  Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize. 
D.  Sweepstakes terminal device facility means any location in this Municipality where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except as provided in O.R.C.  2915.02(G). 
(bbb)  Sweepstakes means any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon chance. "Sweepstakes" does not include bingo as authorized under this chapter, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by O.R.C. Ch. 3769, lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by O.R.C. Ch. 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by O.R.C. Ch. 3772. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.01) 
517.02 - GAMBLING. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates bookmaking; 
(2)  Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance; 
(3)  Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance; 
(4)  Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood; 
(5)  Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility and either: 
A.  Give to another person any item described in subsection (vv)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Section 517.01 as a prize for playing or participating in a sweepstakes; or 
B.  Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of $10.00 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.00. 
(6)  Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility without first obtaining a current annual "certificate of registration" from the Attorney General as required by division (F) of O.R.C.  2915.02. 
(7)  With purpose to violate subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such game or scheme. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(d)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Games of chance, if all of the following apply: 
A.  The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for money. 
B.  The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization that is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is, exempt from Federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
C.  The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. 
A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (d)(1)C. hereof if the veteran's or fraternal organization has already leased the premises 12 times during the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (d)(1)C. hereof, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under Section 517.06(b)(1) when it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct bingo games. 
D.  All of the money or assets received from the games of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of chance are used by, or given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), (2) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
E.  The games of chance are not conducted during, or within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Section 517.13. 
No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donations, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance. 
(2)  Any tag fishing tournament operated under a permit issued under O.R.C.  1533.92, as "tag fishing tournament" is defined in O.R.C.  1531.01. 
(3)  Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license issued under O.R.C.  2915.08. 
(e)  Subsection (d) hereof shall not be construed to authorize the sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games of chance, as granted by subsection (d) hereof, by any charitable organization that is granted that right. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, gambling is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.02) 
517.03 - OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE. 
(a)  No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or supervision of premises, shall: 
(1)  Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of Section 517.02; 
(2)  Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied for gambling in violation of Section 517.02. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(c)  Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 3767. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.03) 
517.04 - PUBLIC GAMING. 
(a)  No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance. 
(b)  No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or supervision, of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(e)  Premises used or occupied in violation of subsection (b) of this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under O.R.C. Ch. 3767. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.04) 
517.05 - CHEATING. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of any of the following: 
(1)  The subject of a bet; 
(2)  A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic or sporting event; 
(3)  A scheme or game of chance; 
(4)  Bingo. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection cheating is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is $1,000.00 or more, or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in O.R.C.  2913.01, cheating is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.05) 
517.06 - METHODS OF CONDUCTING A BINGO GAME; PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of the following: 
(1)  Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment; 
(2)  Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed in its license application and described in Section 517.01(v), or distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and in accordance with O.R.C.  2915.101. 
(b)  No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in Section 517.01(o)(1) shall fail to do any of the following: 
(1)  Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the lesser of $600.00 per bingo session or 45 percent of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not in excess of $450.00 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of $450.00 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall provide the premises to the organization and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week. 
(2)  Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo session is conducted; 
(3)  Conduct the bingo session in accordance with the definition of bingo set forth in Section 517.01(o)(1). 
(c)  No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in Section 517.01(o)(1) shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages; 
(2)  Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in relation to the bingo session; 
(3)  Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in the bingo session; 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions; 
(5)  Pay out more than $6,000.00 in prizes for bingo games described in Section 517.01(o)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization. "Prizes" does not include awards from the conduct of instant bingo; 
(6)  Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.12, at any premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified on its license. Subsection (c)(6) of this section does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time, specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended license, pursuant to division (F) of O.R.C.  2915.08. A charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on its amended license; 
(7)  Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator; 
(8)  Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator; 
(9)  Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service; 
(10)  Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a distributor issued a license under O.R.C.  2915.081; 
(11)  A.  Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under the following circumstances: 
1.  For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids. 
2.  The charitable organization shall provide a participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets. 
3.  The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an electronic bingo aid. 
4.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted. 
5.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used. 
6.  An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used. 
B.  The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with O.R.C. Ch. 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during each bingo session. 
(12)  Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in Section 517.01(o)(1). 
(d)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(3)  Nothing in subsection (d) hereof prohibits an employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization's members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, a charitable organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977. 
(f)  This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2), or (3), (c)(1)-(11) or (d) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2) or (3), (c)(1)-(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2) or (3) or (c)(1)-(11) or (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates subsection (c)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c)(12) of this section, a violation of subsection (c)(12) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.09) 
517.07 - INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT. 
(a)  No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to comply with the requirements of divisions (A)(1), (2), and (3) of O.R.C.  2915.09; 
(2)  Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies: 
A.  That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, is a charitable organization as defined in Section 517.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.08, and is in compliance with O.R.C. Ch. 1716; 
B.  That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) or is a veteran's organization described in subsection 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, and conducts instant bingo under Section 517.14. 
(3)  Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.08; 
(4)  Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo; 
(5)  Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed under O.R.C.  2915.081; 
(6)  Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare; 
(7)  Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of age; 
(8)  Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than three years; 
(9)  Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages; 
(10)  Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in Section 517.09(d); 
(11)  Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in an instant bingo game; 
(12)  A.  Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold; 
B.  Subsection (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare. 
(13)  Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards; 
(14)  Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not purchased from a distributor licensed under O.R.C.  2915.081 as reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required by Section 517.11(f); 
(15)  Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold; 
(16)  Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with O.R.C.  2915.01-2915.13. 
(b)  A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section or a rule adopted under O.R.C.  2915.091(C) is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or of such a rule, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.091) 
517.08 - RAFFLES. 
(a)  (1)  Subject to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and is described in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit. 
(2)  If a charitable organization that is described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least 50 percent of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Section 517.01(v) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or any political subdivision. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for profit. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.092) 
517.09 - CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATIONS. 
(a)  As used in this section, "retail income from all commercial activity" means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services, or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, at not more than one location at which it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and guests as retail income. 
(b)  (1)  If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location. 
(2)  A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no charitable instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets. 
(d)  The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets. 
The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay six percent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this subsection. 
As used in this subsection, "expenses" means those items provided for in subsections (gg)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (12) and (13) of Section 517.01 and that percentage of the owner's or lessor's rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. "Expenses" in the aggregate, shall not exceed six percent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets. 
As used in this subsection, "full gross profit" means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal had been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were redeemed. 
(e)  A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney General with all of the following information: 
(1)  That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a contract entered into pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with an owner or lessor of a location; 
(2)  That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with a new owner or lessor of a location; 
(3)  That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that is in violation of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2915. 
(f)  Subsection (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.093) 
517.10 - LOCATION OF INSTANT BINGO. 
(a)  No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written contract, as described in Section 517.09, with the charitable instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(b)  The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session. 
(c)  No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate any provision of O.R.C. Ch. 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of O.R.C. Ch. 2915. 
(d)  No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the contract. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.094) 
517.11 - BINGO OR GAME OF CHANCE RECORDS. 
(a)  No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance pursuant to Section 517.02(d), shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted: 
(1)  An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number; 
(2)  An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses; 
(3)  A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are winners of prizes of $600.00 or more in value; 
(4)  An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of the bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other purpose set forth in Section 517.01(v), Section 517.02(d), or O.R.C.  2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose; 
(5)  The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization; 
(6)  A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the receipts were excluded from "gross receipts" Section 517.01(t); 
(7)  An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses. 
(b)  A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required to maintain pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at its principal place of business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept. 
(c)  The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in Section 517.01(o)(1) or (2) shall be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the bingo session or game account. 
(d)  Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year. 
(e)  The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with O.R.C. Ch. 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted for. 
(f)  A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each instance: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase; 
(2)  The name and address of the charitable organization or other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided; 
(3)  A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies; 
(4)  Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each charitable organization. 
(g)  A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each instance: 
(1)  The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided; 
(2)  A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including serial numbers; 
(3)  Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each distributor. 
(h)  The Attorney General, or any law enforcement agency, may do all of the following: 
(1)  Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization; 
(2)  Examine the accounts and records of the organization; 
(3)  Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games of chance; 
(4)  Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of chance are conducted; 
(5)  Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred and to determine whether Section 517.12 has been complied with. 
If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this chapter, provided that the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as described in this subsection. 
(i)  No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  Whoever violates subsection (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.10) 
517.12 - BINGO OPERATOR PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  No person shall be a bingo game operator unless he is 18 years of age or older. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(d)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.11) 
517.13 - BINGO EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Ohio Revised Code  2915.07-2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements specified in either subsection (a)(1) or (2) hereof: 
(1)  A.  The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of value including an admission fee, or any fee for bingo cards, sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game or to defray any costs of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the bingo game. 
B.  All prizes awarded during the course of the game are nonmonetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlements to goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is less than $100.00. 
C.  No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game. 
D.  The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours of any of the following: 
1.  A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.07-2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter; 
2.  A scheme or game of chance or bingo described in Section 517.01(o)(2). 
E.  The number of players participating in the bingo game does not exceed 50. 
(2)  A.  The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than 25 cents to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo. 
B.  The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo does not exceed $100.00. 
C.  All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments. 
D.  The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not exceed $100.00. 
E.  No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game. 
F.  The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of either of the following: 
1.  A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.07-2915.11 or Section 517.06 et seq. of this chapter; 
2.  A scheme of chance or game of chance or bingo described in Section 517.01(o)(2). 
G.  All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo game is conducted. 
H.  The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and not more than twice in a calendar week. 
(b)  The Attorney General, or any local law enforcement agency, may investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported amusement bingo game does not comply with subsection (a) hereof. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.12) 
517.14 - INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT BY A VETERAN'S OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. 
(a)  A veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to O.R.C.  2915.01-2915.12 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m. 
(2)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its own members and invited guests. 
(3)  The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization is raising money for an organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with that organization as required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (a) of this section is raising money for another organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this state, the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2) or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this state. 
(c)  (1)  If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (a) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under O.R.C. Ch. 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2915. 
(2)  No veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2915. 
(d)  A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization has entered into a written contract. 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.13) 
517.15 - SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall give to another person any item described in Section 517.01(vv)(1), (2), (3), or (4) in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-prize game won on a skill-based amusement machine. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct. Except as provided herein, a violation of subsection (a)(1) is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1), a violation of subsection (a)(1) is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.06) 
(b)  Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by this chapter and O.R.C. Ch. 2915 and not by O.R.C. Ch. 1345. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2915.061) 
517.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 521 - HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Tampering with safety devices,  541.04 
State Law reference- Flagpole installation in sidewalk, O.R.C.  723.012; Excavation liability, O.R.C.  723.49 et seq.; Removal of noxious weeds or litter, O.R.C.  731.51 et seq.; Nuisances, O.R.C. Ch. 3767 

521.01 - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS. 
(a)  No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3767.29) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
521.02 - VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS. 
(a)  A brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace, water heater or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gas: 
(1)  When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning; 
(2)  When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in subsection (a) hereof, or used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning. 
(b)  This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the same are used as space or room heaters. 
(c)  No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this section. 
(d)  Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shutoff system, and that has its fuel piped from a source outside of the building in which it is located, that are approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under O.R.C.  3737.82. 
(e)  The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from subsection (a) hereof when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under O.R.C.  3781.10. No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules adopted under this subsection. 
(f)  The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules adopted under this subsection. 
(g)  No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having a flash point below 100 degrees fahrenheit or 37.8 degrees centigrade shall be sold, offered for sale or used in any kerosene space heater. 
(h)  No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas space heater. 
(i)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from subsection (a) hereof unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use." 
(j)  No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him under O.R.C.  3737.82. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3701.82) 
(k)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3701.99(C)) 
521.03 - BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS. 
(a)  No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to life or limb. 
(b)  No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent injury to life or limb. 
(c)  Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement, cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.04 - SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY. 
(a)  No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk, playground or other public place any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or upon such sidewalk or playground. 
(b)  No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement. 
(c)  No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods, material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the delivery or pickup of such articles. In no such case shall the obstruction remain on such sidewalk for more than one hour. 
(d)  No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise, goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage or injury. The affected area shall be rendered safe and free from danger. 
(e)  No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous condition. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.05 - NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES. 
(a)  No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is made as required by law: 
To fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains or natural watercourses as provided in O.R.C.  715.47. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.06 - DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of abutting lands shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs or gutters in repair and free from snow, ice or any nuisance. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  723.011) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.07 - FENCES. 
(a)  No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical current. 
(b)  No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence which abuts or is adjacent to any public street or sidewalk. This subsection (b) does not prevent the placement and use of not more than three strands of barbed wire on top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided such strands are not less than 72 inches from the ground. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.08 - LITTERING AND DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, JUNK, ETC. 
(a)  No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by the person, or in or on waters of the state, or Municipality, unless one of the following applies: 
(1)  The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a litter collection drive; 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, the person deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away by the elements; 
(3)  The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 3734 or 6111. 
(b)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter, or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public property or on any private property not owned by the person, unless one of the following applies: 
(1)  The litter was generated or located on the property on which the litter receptacle is located. 
(2)  The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a litter collection drive. 
(3)  The person is directed to do so by a person whom the person reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle. 
(4)  The litter consists of any of the following: 
A.  The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle; 
B.  The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or carried and used in a motor vehicle; 
C.  Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings and containers of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle; 
D.  Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers and other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle by a casual passerby. 
(c)  (1)  As used in subsection (b)(1) hereof, public property includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business, the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of access. 
(2)  As used in subsection (b)(4) hereof, casual passerby means a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as the person's primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter receptacle is located. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Litter means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. 
(2)  Deposit means to throw, drop, discard or place. 
(3)  Litter receptacle means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3767.32) 
(e)  No person shall cause or allow litter to be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public, or unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render unwholesome or impure, any natural watercourse. 
(f)  Whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in lieu of the penalty provided in this subsection require a person who violates subsections (a) to (d) hereof to remove litter from any public or private property, or in or on any waters. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3767.99(C)) 
(g)  Whoever violates subsection (e) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
521.09 - NOXIOUS OR OFFENSIVE ODORS. 
(a)  No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling, building, structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade, employment or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3767.13) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
521.10 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Section 521.10, which pertained to nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly, was repealed by Ordinance 2004-56, passed August 3, 2004. See Chapter 522 for current smoking regulations. 
521.11 - LANDING OF AIRCRAFT. 
(a)  As used in this section the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Aircraft means any contrivance heavier than air used or designed for aviation or flight and carrying a pilot in the air except a parachute or other contrivance for such aviation used primarily as safety equipment, and specifically including hot air balloons and similar devices. 
(2)  Emergency Aircraft means any aircraft operated by any branch of the United States Military Forces or its reserve units; the Ohio National Guard or the National Guard of any other state; any Federal or State of Ohio law enforcement agency; any hospital or other entity operating aircraft primarily for the purpose of emergency medical evacuation. 
(3)  Landing field or land sites means any location either on land or water of such size and nature as to permit the landing or taking off of aircraft with safety, and used for that purpose, whether or not equipped to provide for the shelter, supply or care of aircraft. 
(4)  Pilot means any individual who is in command of an aircraft and engages in the navigation of the aircraft, whether or not such person holds the title of "Pilot." 
(5)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof. 
(b)  No person shall land an aircraft except an emergency aircraft within the corporate limits of the City other than at a landing field without the prior approval in writing by the Department of Transportation of the State of Ohio, the Federal Aviation Administration, and chief law enforcement officer for the City of Powell. For purposes of this section, the pilot is presumed to be in control of the aircraft. 
(c)  The Chief Law Enforcement Officer for the City of Powell may approve the landing of aircraft within the City for special events or occasions when such land would otherwise be prohibited by the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 2003-31, 5-20-2003) 
521.12 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND OBSTRUCTION OF THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes to be introduced, into the MSF any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for a violation of subsection (a) that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
(2)  A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting by the Fire Department; 
(3)  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials that the Fire Code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge; 
(4)  Agricultural stormwater runoff; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing or disinfection that contains no harmful quantity of total residual chlorine (TRC) or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(6)  A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
(8)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing drain; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
(13)  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(15)  A discharge or flow from cold water (or hot water with prior permission of the Director) used in street washing or cosmetic cleaning that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or 
(16)  Drainage from a private residential swimming pool or hot tub/spa containing no harmful quantities of chlorine or other chemicals. Drainage from swimming pool filter backwash is prohibited; 
(17)  A discharge or flow of uncontaminated storm water pumped from an excavation or existing pond. 
(c)  No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) if: 
(1)  The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the City Engineer to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the waters of the state or to the MS4; 
(2)  Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger; 
(3)  The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the discharge; 
(4)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of any substance. 
(d)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain rules or word usage apply to the text as follows: 
(1)  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4): "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System" or "MS4" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): 
A.  Owned or operated by the City; 
B.  Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; 
C.  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
D.  Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined by Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 122.2 (40 CFR 122.2). 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, 3-23-2004) 
521.13 - REGULATING COMMERCIAL DUMPSTER PICK-UP TIMES. 
(a)  Garbage from commercial dumpsters and other trash receptacles shall not be picked up from commercial properties adjacent to residential areas in the City of Powell between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The failure to comply with this requirement is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be punishable as a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, 2-5-2012) 
521.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 522 - SMOKING PROHIBITIONS 
Sections: 

522.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Business means any entity of any nature whatsoever including a partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust or any other entity formed for the purpose of making profit including retail establishments where goods or services are sold and including professional organizations and other entities furnishing services including legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, financial, counseling, or other professional or consumer related services. 
    Enclosed areas means any area closed in by a roof or overhead covering of any kind and walls or other side coverings of any kind on at least three sides with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
    Family owned means any entity which is entirely owned and operated by descendants of a common ancestor or their spouses. 
    Lodging facilities means any facility, which rents rooms to guests. 
    Place of employment means that portion of any area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of their employment including but not limited to private offices, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, employee gymnasiums, auditoriums, libraries, storage rooms, file rooms, mail rooms, employee medical facilities, rooms or areas containing photo copying or other office equipment used in common by employees, elevators, stairways, hallways, factories, warehouses, garages, laboratories, taxis, limousines, and company owed or leased vehicles used for a business purpose. "Place of Employment" only includes private residences whether single or multi-family, if used as a childcare, adult daycare or healthcare facility or if a person uses a private residence in anyway otherwise qualifying that person as an employer with respect to the use of the private residence; provided, however, that private residences are exempt from this chapter to the extent that the person providing the services is providing housecleaning, home maintenance or personal care services in the private residence. 
    Proprietor means the owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or other person in charge or control of the public place or place of employment. 
    Public place means that portion of an enclosed area to which members of the general public are invited or to which general members of the public are permitted and includes service lines. A private residence is not a "Public Place" unless members of the public are invited for any reason including for business purposes or unless it is used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail store used primarily for the sale of smoking material and smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental. "Retail Tobacco Store" does not include the tobacco department of a larger commercial establishment such as a department store, discount store or bar. 
    Service line means any line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoker means the individual smoking any substance such as a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other substance whether or not actually inhaling or exhaling the smoke. 
    Smoking means burning including the inhaling or exhaling thereof of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other burning substance. 
    Smoking materials means any cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other smoking equipment in any form. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.02 - PROHIBITION. 
(a)  No proprietor of a public place or place of employment shall permit smoking in said public place or place of employment nor shall any smoker engage in smoking in a public place or place of employment within the City of Powell except as provided in Section 522.03. 
(b)  All enclosed areas including buildings and vehicles owned or controlled by the City of Powell shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All areas immediately adjacent to the main ingress and egress of any enclosed area shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the enclosed area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.021 - PROHIBITION IN PUBLIC PARKS; SMOKE FREE ZONES. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry lighted cigarettes, pipes, cigars and other tobacco products within designated smoke free zones located in public parks leased or owned by the City. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions set forth in Section 522.01, the following definitions shall apply to this section: 
(1)  Public parks leased or owned the City shall mean any place or area within the City of Powell upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where children gather for play and more limited areas used by the public such as restrooms and shelter houses. 
(2)  Smoke Free Zone means a 50 feet area designated by the City as smoke free including, but not limited to, playgrounds, restrooms and/or shelter houses or other areas as may be determined by Council from time to time, located in public parks leased or owned by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2012-35, 10-16-2012) 
522.03 - AREAS WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the prohibitions of Section 522.02. 
(a)  Private residences except if a place of employment or if used as a license childcare, adult daycare or healthcare facility provided, however, that private residences are exempt from this chapter to the extent that the person providing services is providing housecleaning, home maintenance, cable or telephone repair or personal care services in the private residence. 
(b)  Lodging facilities that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms provided, however, that not more than 35 percent of the rooms in such lodging facility rented to guests may be so designated and, such rooms must be contiguous to one another. 
(c)  Family owned and operated businesses in which all employees are related to the owner and offices of self-employed persons in which all employees are related to the self-employed person but only if the enclosed area is occupied by these businesses and offices are not open to the public and not in the same building with other enclosed areas subject to this regulation and smoke in these businesses and offices does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Any home defined in O.R.C.  3721.10(A) but only to the extent that it is necessary to comply with the provisions of O.R.C.  3721.13(A)(18) and rules promulgated according to that section. 
(e)  Retail tobacco stores defined in this chapter in operation prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. Any new retail tobacco store or any existing tobacco store that relocates to another site may only qualify for this exemption if it is located in a free-standing structure more than 20 feet from another enclosed area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.04 - INTERPRETATION. 
    This chapter shall be liberally construed to further its legislative purpose, namely, the prohibition of secondhand smoke within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.05 - OTHER SMOKING PROHIBITIONS. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or other person in charge or control of an establishment or facility which does not otherwise qualify as a public place or place of employment may declare such establishment or facility as a non-smoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to Section 522.06 is posted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.06 - SIGNS. 
    In addition to the prohibitions contained in Section 522.02, the proprietor of a public place or place of employment shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited shall post a conspicuous sign at every entrance to such public place or place of employment clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. The sign shall be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to one of normal vision. The sign may consist of the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it. All signs contain a method and manner for reporting violations. 
(b)  All receptacles including ashtrays used for disposing of smoking materials shall be removed from every public place and place of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the City Department of Police and any other entity designated by Council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.08 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any portion of this chapter is held to be invalid for any reason whatsoever, the invalidity shall not affect the main provisions of the chapter, which can be given effect in light of such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
522.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of permitting smoking in public places or places of employment. Such offense is a minor misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $150.00. 
(b)  Strict liability is intended for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004) 
CHAPTER 525 - LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC OFFICE[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Law enforcement officer defined,  501.01(k); Misconduct at an emergency,  509.05; Making false alarms,  509.07; Personating an officer to defraud,  545.16 

525.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Public official means any elected or appointed officer, or employee, or agent of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to, legislators, judges and law enforcement officers. "Public official" does not include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under O.R.C.  187.01. 
    Public servant means any of the following: 
(1)  Any public official; 
(2)  Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including, but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master, arbitrator, advisor or consultant; 
(3)  A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not the person is elected or appointed to the office for which the person is a candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this subsection if the person has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public office, or if the person has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to have the person's name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special election, or if the person campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary, general or special election. "Public servant" does not include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under O.R.C.  187.01. 
    Party official means any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which the person directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs at any level of responsibility. 
    Official proceeding means any proceeding before a legislative, judicial, administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition in connection with an official proceeding. 
    Detention means arrest, confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest, confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged with or convicted of a crime in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States; hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of O.R.C.  2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39 or 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation, except as provided in this subsection, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures; that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under O.R.C.  311.29(E) or O.R.C.  5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to O.R.C.  5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site. 
    Detention facility means any public or private place used for the confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this State or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States. 
    Valuable thing or valuable benefit includes, but is not limited to, a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986. 
    Campaign committee, contribution, political action committee, legislative campaign fund, political party and political contributing entity have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  3517.01. 
    Provider agreement has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  5164.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.01) 
525.02 - FALSIFICATION. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The statement is made in any official proceeding. 
(2)  The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another. 
(3)  The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in performing the public official's official function. 
(4)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention and contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic development assistance as defined in O.R.C.  9.66; or other benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury. 
(5)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate, registration, release or provider agreement. 
(6)  The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or another person empowered to administer oaths. 
(7)  The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or return that is required or authorized by law. 
(8)  The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed relies upon it to that person's detriment. 
(9)  The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a theft offense. 
(10)  The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application, petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report. 
(11)  The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or other writing that is required by law. 
(12)  The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a court of record. 
(13)  The statement is required under O.R.C.  5743.71 in connection with the person's purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale. 
(b)  It is no defense to a charge under subsection (a)(6) hereof that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner. 
(c)  If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but only that one or the other was false. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates any provision of subsection (a)(1)-(8) or (10)-(13) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(9) hereof is guilty of falsification in a theft offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000.00 or more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is liable in a civil action to any person harmed by the violation for injury, death, or loss to person or property incurred as a result of the commission of the offense and for reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred as a result of prosecuting the civil action commenced under this section. A civil action under this section is not the exclusive remedy of a person who incurs injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of a violation of this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.13) 
525.03 - IMPERSONATION OF PEACE OFFICER. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Peace officer means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or township constable who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under O.R.C.  3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority under O.R.C.  306.35(Y), a state university law enforcement officer appointed under O.R.C.  3345.04; a veterans' home police officer appointed under O.R.C.  5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under O.R.C.  4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions. 
(2)  Private police officer means any security guard, special police officer, private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police capacity. 
(3)  Federal law enforcement officer means an employee of the United States who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation, apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses under the criminal laws of the United States. 
(4)  Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2903.11. 
(5)  Impersonate means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of or display the identification of a particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member of that class of persons. 
(b)  No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(c)  No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, shall arrest or detain any person, search any person or search the property of any person. 
(d)  No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the state or the Municipality or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) hereof that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose. 
(f)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsections (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a violation of subsection (d) hereof is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.51) 
525.04 - COMPOUNDING A CRIME. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending criminal prosecution. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both of the following apply: 
(1)  The pending prosecution involved is for violation of Sections 545.05, 545.07, 545.09 or 545.10(b)(2), or O.R.C.  2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, of which the actor under this section was the victim. 
(2)  The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him as restitution for the loss caused him by the offense. 
(c)  When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution under subsection (b) hereof, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the state or Municipality to abandoning the prosecution. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.21) 
525.05 - FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME, INJURY OR KNOWLEDGE OF DEATH. 
(a)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, no person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report such information to law enforcement authorities. 
(2)  No person, knowing that a violation of division (B) of O.R.C.  2913.04 has been, or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law enforcement authorities. 
(b)  Except for conditions that are within the scope of subsection (e) hereof, no person who is a physician, limited practitioner, nurse or other person giving aid to a sick or injured person, shall negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound that the person treated or observed, or any serious physical harm to persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from an offense of violence. 
(c)  No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, ambulance service, emergency squad or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred or knowledge concerning the death is obtained. 
(d)  No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom the person has made a report required by subsection (c) hereof, or to any law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within the person's knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death. 
(e)  (1)  As used in this subsection (e), "burn injury" means any of the following: 
A.  Second or third degree burns; 
B.  Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of super-heated air; 
C.  Any burn injury or wound that may result in death. 
(2)  No physician, nurse or limited practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(3)  No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(4)  No person who is required to report any burn injury under subsection (e)(2) or (3) hereof shall fail to file, within three working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury with the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal. 
(5)  Anyone participating in the making of reports under subsection (e) hereof or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding O.R.C.  4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person's burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted pursuant to subsection (e) hereof. 
(f)  (1)  Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern or resident, registered or licensed practical nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker, social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist or marriage and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in O.R.C.  3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient's or client's records. 
(2)  Notwithstanding O.R.C.  4731.22, the doctor-patient privilege shall not be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or belief noted under subsection (f)(1) of this section, and the information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the rules of evidence. 
(g)  Subsections (a) and (d) of this section do not require disclosure of information, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between attorney and client; doctor and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client; licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications relay service call. 
(2)  The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's immediate family. 
(3)  Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news source, privileged under O.R.C.  2739.04 or 2739.12. 
(4)  Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of the clergy. 
(5)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or services provider certified pursuant to O.R.C.  5119.36. 
(6)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of O.R.C.  2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in violation of former O.R.C.  2907.12. As used in this subsection, "counseling services" include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide such services. 
(h)  No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence. 
(i)  Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of subsection (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(j)  Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(k)  (1)  Whoever negligently violates subsection (e) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever knowingly violates subsection (e) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.22) 
525.06 - FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. 
(a)  No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person giving it. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.23) 
525.07 - OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS. 
(a)  No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful duties. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official business. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.31) 
525.08 - OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for a misdemeanor, or to assist another to benefit from the commission of a misdemeanor, and no person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of an act that if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other person or child; 
(2)  Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(3)  Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the misdemeanor, or act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process summoning the person to testify or supply evidence; 
(5)  Communicate false information to any person. 
(6)  Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or prosecution of the other person or child. 
(b)  A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated a delinquent child for committing, a violation of subsection (a) hereof, regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used under subsection (c) hereof in determining the penalty for the violation of subsection (a) hereof, regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice. 
(2)  If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the misdemeanor committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Adult and child have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2151.011. 
(2)  Delinquent child has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2152.02. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.32) 
525.09 - RESISTING ARREST. 
(a)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another. 
(b)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law enforcement officer. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A violation of subsection (a) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of subsection (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.33) 
525.10 - HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT. 
(a)  No public official shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  During the public official's term of office or within one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission or board of which the public official was a member at the time of authorization unless the contract was let by competitive bidding, to the lowest and best bidder; 
(2)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract entered into by or for the use of the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected; 
(3)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract that is not let by competitive bidding if required by law, and that involves more than $150.00. 
(b)  In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official, member of a public official's family or any of a public official's business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other organization that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested; 
(2)  The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as creditor does not exceed five percent of the total indebtedness of the corporation or other organization; 
(3)  That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into, files with the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in connection with the corporation or other organization. 
(c)  This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public official's business associates, has an interest, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved; 
(2)  The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved; 
(3)  The treatment accorded the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions; 
(4)  The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full knowledge by the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the public official's family or business associate, and the public official takes no part in the deliberations or decisions of the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract. 
(d)  Subsection (a)(4) does not prohibit participation by a public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or influence of the public employee's office or employment to secure benefits from the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of this section. 
(e)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest in a public contract. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(f)  It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with O.R.C.  309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipal corporation or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with O.R.C.  733.621 and 2921.421. 
(g)  Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Public contract means any of the following: 
A.  The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the state, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either, including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either. 
B.  A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of any public property. 
(2)  Chief legal officer has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  733.621. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.42) 
525.11 - SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION. 
(a)  No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following: 
(1)  Any compensation, other than is allowed by O.R.C.  102.03(G), (H), and (I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's public compensation; 
(2)  Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to perform the public servant's official duties. 
(b)  No public servant for the public servant's own personal or business use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following: 
(1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office, employment or agency; 
(2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment. 
(c)  No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the following: 
(1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office, employment or agency; 
(2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(e)  A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in this Municipality for a period of seven years from the date of conviction. 
(f)  Subsections (a), (b) and (c) hereof do not prohibit a person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.43) 
525.12 - DERELICTION OF DUTY. 
(a)  No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay; 
(2)  Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power to do so alone or with available assistance. 
(b)  No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding. 
(c)  No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently do any of the following: 
(1)  Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary; 
(2)  Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention; 
(3)  Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another; 
(4)  Allow a prisoner to escape; 
(5)  Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the management of the detention facility. 
(d)  No public official of the Municipality shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the legislative authority of the Municipality for the use in any one year of the department, agency or institution with which the public official is connected. 
(e)  No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant's office. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(g)  As used in this section, "public servant" includes an officer or employee of a contractor as defined in O.R.C.  9.08. 
525.13 - INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS. 
(a)  No public servant, under color of his office, employment or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.45) 
525.14 - UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEMS ON MOTOR VEHICLES. 
(a)  No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.441) 
525.15 - ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR AN ASSISTANCE DOG. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted. 
(2)  The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse. 
(b)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse; 
(2)  Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse; 
(3)  Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following: 
A.  Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer's control of the police dog or horse; 
B.  Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog or horse; 
C.  Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control; 
D.  Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; 
E.  Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to a police dog or horse; 
(5)  If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted. 
(2)  The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an assistance dog. 
(d)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog; 
(2)  Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog; 
(3)  Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the following: 
A.  Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person's control of the dog; 
B.  Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog; 
C.  Releases the dog from its area of control; 
D.  Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; 
E.  Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the assisted or served person. 
(4)  Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to an assistance dog; 
(5)  If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse, and shall be punished as provided in subsection (e)(1)A. and B. of this section. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of the police dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony of the third degree and the court shall impose as a mandatory prison term one of the prison terms prescribed for a felony of the third degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse other than its death, assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony of the fourth degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
B.  In addition to any other sanction imposed for assaulting a police dog or horse, if the violation of subsection (a) of this section results in the death of the police dog or horse, the sentencing court shall impose as a financial sanction a mandatory fine under O.R.C.  2929.18(B)(10). The fine shall be paid to the law enforcement agency that was served by the police dog or horse that was killed, and shall be used by that agency only for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  If the dog or horse was not owned by the agency, the payment to the owner of the dog or horse of the cost of the dog or horse and the cost of the training of the dog or horse to qualify it as a police dog or horse, if that cost has not previously been paid by the agency; 
2.  After payment of the costs described in subsection (e)(1)B.1. of this section, if applicable, payment of the cost of replacing the dog or horse that was killed; 
3.  After payment of the costs described in subsection (e)(1)B.1. of this section, if applicable, payment of the cost of training the replacement dog or horse to qualify it as a police dog or horse; 
4.  After payment of the costs described in subsection (e)(1)B.1. of this section, if applicable, payment of the cost of further training of the replacement dog or horse that is needed to train it to the level of training that had been achieved by the dog or horse that was killed. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this section, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of the police dog or horse, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony of the third degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse, but does not result in its death, harassing a police dog or horse, is a felony of the fourth degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse, but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this section, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of the assistance dog, assaulting an assistance dog is a felony of the third degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the assistance dog other than its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a felony of the fourth degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this section, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in the death of the assistance dog, harassing an assistance dog is a felony of the third degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the assistance dog, but does not result in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a felony of the fourth degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog, but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  In addition to any other sanction or penalty imposed for the offense under this section, O.R.C. ch. 2929, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code, whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following: 
A.  Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section; 
B.  The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the violation; 
C.  If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog; 
D.  If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation. 
(f)  This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct is in accordance with O.R.C. ch. 4741. 
(g)  This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Physical harm means any injury, illness, or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
(2)  Police dog or horse means a dog or horse that has been trained, and may be used, to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(3)  Serious physical harm means any of the following: 
A.  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
B.  Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves some temporary, substantial maiming; 
C.  Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that results in substantial suffering. 
(4)  Assistance dog, blind, and mobility impaired person have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  955.011. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.321) 
525.16 - FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT. 
(a)  As used in this section, peace officer has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2935.01. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of the officer's duties if the person knows that the allegation is false. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making a false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.15) 
525.17 - REFUSAL TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION IN PUBLIC PLACE. 
(a)  No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following: 
(1)  The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a criminal offense. 
(2)  The person witnessed any of the following: 
A.  An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the laws of this state; 
B.  A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or to property; 
C.  Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing, any offense identified in subsection (a)(2)A. or B. of this section; 
D.  Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in subsection (a)(2)A. or B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or complicity described in subsection (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being, or is about to be committed. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(c)  Nothing in this section requires a person to answer any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed. 
(d)  It is not a violation of this section to refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2921.29) 
525.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 529 - LIQUOR CONTROL[8] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Disorderly conduct; intoxication,  509.03; Using weapons while intoxicated,  549.03 
State Law reference- Prohibiting sale of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, O.R.C.  4301.22(D); Local option, O.R.C.  4301.32 et seq., 4303.29 

529.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in the Codified Ordinances: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. Such term excludes denatured alcohol and wood alcohol. 
    Beer includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from malt products and containing one-half of one percent or more, but not more than 12 percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Intoxicating liquor and liquor include all liquids and compounds, other than beer as defined hereof, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever name called and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented. Such phrase includes cider and alcohol and all solids and confections which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
    Low-alcohol beverage means any brewed or fermented malt product, or any product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural products, that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. The beverages described hereof do not include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer. 
    Person includes firms and corporations. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.01) 
529.02 - SALES TO AND USE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS; SECURING PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, or shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian. 
In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a violation of this subsection shall be charged, for the same offense, with a violation of O.R.C.  4301.22(A)(1). 
(b)  No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. 
An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this subsection that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions. 
(c)  No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin, campground or restaurant when he knows or has reason to know either of the following: 
(1)  That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the underage person and is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; 
(2)  That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a practitioner and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person. 
(d)  (1)  No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage person. 
(2)  No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of age or older for the purpose of violating this section. 
(e)  No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating liquor, in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The prohibitions set forth in this subsection (e) hereof against an underage person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious purposes. 
(f)  No parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Section 529.021(a)-(c). 
(g)  The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Drug of abuse has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3719.011. 
(2)  Hotel has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3731.01. 
(3)  Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and prescription have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
(4)  Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
(5)  Underage person means a person under the age of 21 years. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.69) 
(i)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof shall be fined not less than $500.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99) 
529.021 - PURCHASE BY MINOR; MISREPRESENTATION. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.63) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or other identification of any person under 21 years of age for the purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.633) 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the person's name, age or other identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any place where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control or sold by the Division of Liquor Control. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.634) 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof, shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (a) hereof may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed. 
(3)  A.  Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of that subsection, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. 
B.  On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in O.R.C.  4510.02(A)(7). 
C.  On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. Except as provided in this subsection, the court also may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in O.R.C.  4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of suspending the offenders temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license or driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall perform. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99) 
529.03 - SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS. 
(a)  No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.22) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99) 
529.04 - LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in Section 529.07(d). 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.64) 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(c)  If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license or driver's license, the court may instead require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours to be determined by the court. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99) 
529.05 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent or employee shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating liquor in this Municipality, or transport, import or cause to be transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol on or into this Municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied with O.R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4303.25) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
529.06 - LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES; SALE TO AND PURCHASE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  As used in this section, "underage person" means a person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage. 
(c)  No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt to purchase any low-alcohol beverage. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage person, by purchase or as a gift. 
(e)  No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the person's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this Municipality. 
(f)  No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian. 
(g)  No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage. 
An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions. 
(h)  No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol beverage in any public or private place, unless accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious purposes. 
(i)  No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.631) 
(j)  Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(k)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (b) hereof may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99) 
529.07 - OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Chauffeured limousine means a vehicle registered under O.R.C.  4503.24. 
(2)  Street, highway and motor vehicle have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
(b)  No person shall have in the person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  In a state liquor store; 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, on the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control; 
(3)  In any other public place; 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) hereof, while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking; 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) hereof, while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(c)  (1)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened container of any of the following: 
A.  Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D- 5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7 or F-8 permit; 
B.  Beer, wine or mixed beverages served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit or wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit; 
C.  Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a convention facility as provided in O.R.C.  4303.201; 
D.  Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission. 
E.  Spirituous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample, as defined in O.R.C.  4301.171. 
(2)  A person may have in the person's possession on an F liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the F permit is issued. As used in this section, "music festival" means a series of outdoor live musical performances, extending for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres. 
(3)  A.  A person may have in the person's possession on a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued. 
B.  As used in subsection (c)(3)A. of this section: 
1.  Orchestral performance means a concert comprised of a group of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments. 
2.  Outdoor performing arts center means an outdoor performing arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each year. 
(4)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in subsection (c)(3)B.1. hereof if the person with supervision and control over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location. 
(5)  A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is attending an orchestral performance and the holder the F-9 permit grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-9 permit is issued. 
As used in subsection (c)(5) hereof, "orchestral performance" has the same meaning as in subsection (c)(3)B. of this section. 
(6)  A.  A person may have in the person's possession on the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if both of the following apply: 
1.  The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and 
2.  The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility; 
B.  As used in subsection (c)(6)A. of this section: 
1.  "Racing event" means a motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations. 
2.  "Outdoor motorsports facility" means an outdoor racetrack to which all of the following apply: 
a.  It is two and four-tenths miles or more in length. 
b.  It is located on 200 acres or more of land. 
c.  The primary business of the owner of the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events. 
d.  The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit is located on the property of the facility. 
(7)  A.  A person may have in the person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an outdoor refreshment area created under O.R.C.  4301.82, if the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a qualified permit holder to which both of the following apply: 
1.  The permit holder's premises is located within the outdoor refreshment area. 
2.  The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor refreshment area designation. 
B.  Subsection (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do either of the following: 
1.  Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere; 
2.  Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
(d)  This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of the fee imposed for the use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged contract, or the guest of such a person, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine; 
(2)  The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator of the limousine is located; 
(3)  The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(e)  An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with. 
(2)  The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with subsection (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by the driver. 
(f)  (1)  Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under subsection (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply: 
A.  The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking. 
B.  The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
C.  The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle as opened container of beer or wine. 
D.  The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine. 
(2)  The legislative authority of a municipal corporation or township may enact an ordinance or adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened container or beer or wine. 
(3)  As used in this section, "commercial quadricycle" means a vehicle that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a bicycle. 
B.  It has at least five seats for passengers. 
C.  It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and the passengers. 
D.  It is used for commercial purposes. 
E.  It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.62) 
(g)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4301.99(A)) 
529.08 - HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION. 
(a)  This rule shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor. 
(b)  No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or delivered by an A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5G, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, G or I permit holder: 
(1)  From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(2)  On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(3)  Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(c)  No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquid shall be sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5I, D-5J, or D-7 permit holder: 
(1)  From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(2)  On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(3)  Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(d)  Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in subsection (b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b), unless statutorily authorized otherwise. 
(e)  The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m. 
State Law reference- (OAC 4301:1-1-49) 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
529.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 533 - OBSCENITY AND SEX OFFENSES[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Complicity,  501.10; Offensive conduct,  509.03; Telephone harassment,  537.10; Criminal trespass,  541.05 

533.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Sexual conduct means vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete vaginal or anal intercourse. 
    Sexual contact means any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying either person. 
    Sexual activity means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both. 
    Prostitute means a male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to another. 
    Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any material or performance describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado- masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply: 
(1)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex. 
(2)  The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for juveniles. 
(3)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles. 
    When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible group, judged with reference to such group, any material or performance is obscene if any of the following apply: 
(1)  Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest; 
(2)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way which tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite; 
(3)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality; 
(4)  Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way which inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose; 
(5)  It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such interest is primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Nudity means the showing, representation or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Juvenile means an unmarried person under the age of 18. 
    Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record, or tape, or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data storage device. 
    Performance means any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
    Spouse means a person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the following apply: 
(1)  When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement authorized by O.R.C.  3103.06; 
(2)  During the pendency of an action between the parties for annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation; 
(3)  In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective date of the judgment for legal separation. 
    Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Mental health client or patient has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2305.51. 
    Mental health professional has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2305.115. 
    Sado-masochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.01) 
533.02 - PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE; ACTUAL NOTICE AND DEFENSE. 
(a)  An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in selling materials or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by Section 533.11, is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance involved, if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents. 
(b)  Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in writing by the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction in which the person to whom the notice is directed does business. Such notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to juveniles and bear the date of such notice. 
(c)  Section 533.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of a theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the operator's or projectionist's place of employment, other than wages. 
(d)  (1)  Sections 533.11, 533.12(a) and 533.13 do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. 
(2)  Subsection (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of Section 533.11, 533.12 or 533.13, or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(3)  Subsection (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring information that is engaged in the violation of Section 533.11, 533.12 or 533.13, and that contains content that person has selected and introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over which that person exercises editorial control. 
(e)  An employer is not guilty of a violation of Section 533.11, 533.12, or 533.13 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of employee's or agent's employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following: 
(1)  With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct. 
(2)  The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or agent's conduct. 
(f)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under Section 533.11 or 533.13 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or another electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable, effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology. 
(g)  If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions are severable. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.35) 
533.03 - UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR. 
(a)  No person, who is 18 years of age or older, shall engage in sexual conduct with another, who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct with a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender is four years older or more than the other person, or if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of O.R.C.  2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or former O.R.C.  2907.12, unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.04) 
533.04 - SEXUAL IMPOSITION. 
(a)  No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more persons to have sexual contact when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard. 
(2)  The offender knows that the other person's or one of the other person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired. 
(3)  The offender knows that the other person or one of the other persons submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact. 
(4)  The other person or one of the other persons is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the age of such person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or more years older than such other person. 
(5)  The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes. 
(b)  No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06 or 2907.12, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.06) 
533.05 - IMPORTUNING. 
Editor's note- Former Section 533.05 has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. Section 533.05 was identical to O.R.C.  2907.07(B) which the Ohio Supreme Court held to be unconstitutional in State v. Thompson, 95 Ohio St. 3rd 264 (2002). 
533.06 - VOYEURISM. 
(a)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another. 
(b)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the other person in a state of nudity. 
(c)  No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism. 
(2)  A violation of subsection (a) hereof is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(3)  A violation of subsection (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(4)  A violation of subsection (c) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.08) 
533.07 - PUBLIC INDECENCY. 
(a)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront others, who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not members of the person's household: 
(1)  Expose the person's private parts; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides in the person's household: 
(1)  Engage in masturbation; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(4)  Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and shall be punished as provided in subsections (c)(2), (3), (4) and (5) of this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section, a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(5)  A violation of subsection (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree unless the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section in which case the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.09) 
533.08 - PROCURING. 
(a)  No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel; 
(2)  Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a prostitute. 
(b)  No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of premises, shall knowingly permit such premises to be used for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity for hire. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c), procuring is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or otherwise involved in a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section is under 16 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates subsection (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute's age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of subsection (b) of this section is under 16 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates subsection (b) of this section knows the prostitute's age, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or otherwise involved in a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section is 16 or 17 years of age at the time of the violation or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of subsection (b) of this section is 16 or 17 years of age at the time of the violation, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.23) 
533.09 - SOLICITING. 
(a)  No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of age or older to engage with such other person in sexual activity for hire. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(c)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of this section, and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the person's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6) of O.R.C.  4510.02. In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(d)  As used in this section, sexual activity for hire means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either such person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.24(A)(1), (C)(1), (E)(2)) 
533.091 - LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another; 
(2)  Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation; 
(3)  Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a stationary vehicle; 
(4)  If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which the offender is the passenger; 
(5)  Interfere with the free passage of another. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
(2)  Public place means any of the following: 
A.  A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility; 
B.  A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place described in subsection (b)(2)A. hereof; 
C.  A place not described in subsection (b)(2)A. or B. hereof that is open to the public. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.241) 
533.10 - PROSTITUTION. 
(a)  No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.25) 
533.11 - DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(a)  No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(2)  Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(3)  While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles. 
(b)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section, that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not obscene: 
(1)  The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile involved. 
(2)  The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or presented to the juvenile. 
(3)  The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth certificate, marriage license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried. 
(c)  (1)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge or other proper person. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) hereof, mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section. 
(d)  (1)  A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles. 
(2)  A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies: 
A.  The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile. 
B.  The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information. 
(e)  If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions are severable. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to juveniles, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance involved is obscene, a violation of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.31) 
533.12 - DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(a)  No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he is the parent, guardian or spouse of such juvenile; 
(2)  Furnish such juvenile with any identification or document purporting to show that such juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married. 
(b)  No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he is 18 years of age or over or married; 
(2)  Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he is 18 years of age or over or married. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who violates subsection (b) hereof shall be adjudged an unruly child, with such disposition of the case as may be appropriate under O.R.C. Ch. 2151. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.33) 
533.13 - DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(a)  No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general public. 
(b)  It is not a violation of subsection (a) hereof if the material in question is displayed by placing it behind "blinder racks" or similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2907.311) 
533.14 - UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE. 
(a)  No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual activity. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(c)  Nothing in this section prevents the legislative authority of a municipal corporation or township from enacting any regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2927.17) 
533.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 537 - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS[10] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Physical harm to persons defined,  501.01 (c), (e); Fighting; provoking violent response,  509.03 

537.01 - NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE. 
(a)  No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section 549.01. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.05) 
537.02 - VEHICULAR HOMICIDE AND MANSLAUGHTER. 
(a)  No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways: 
(1)  A.  Negligently; 
B.  As the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this subsection applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under O.R.C. Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under O.R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense. The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by O.R.C.  2903.06(E). 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under O.R.C. Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under O.R.C.  4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense. 
(c)  The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(1)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Section 501.99. The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. hereof if either of the following applies: 
(1)  The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or O.R.C.  2903.06 or 2903.08. 
(2)  At the time of the offense, the offender was driving under suspension or cancellation under O.R.C. Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under O.R.C.  4507.10. 
(d)  Subsection (a)(1)B. does not apply in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in O.R.C.  2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under O.R.C.  5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in O.R.C.  2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the application of subsections (a)(1)A. or (a)(2) of this section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of those subsections in that construction zone. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Mandatory prison term and mandatory jail term have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(2)  Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense means a violation of O.R.C.  2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section applies, a violation of O.R.C.  2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of O.R.C.  2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000. 
(3)  Construction zone has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  5501.27. 
(4)  Speeding offense means a violation of O.R.C.  4511.21 or a municipal ordinance pertaining to speed. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former law of another state or the United States. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.06(A)(3), (A)(4), (C), (E), (G)) 
(g)  The court imposing a sentence upon an offender for any violation of this section also shall impose a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (B) of O.R.C.  4510.02 that is equivalent in length to the suspension required for a violation of O.R.C.  2903.06 under similar circumstances. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4510.07) 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
537.021 - VEHICULAR ASSAULT IN A CONSTRUCTION ZONE. 
(a)  No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause serious physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense. This subsection applies only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in subsection (d) hereof. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular assault. Except as provided in this subsection, vehicular assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault is a felony if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension imposed under O.R.C. Chapter 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
(c)  The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Section 501.99. 
(d)  This section does not apply in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in O.R.C.  2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under O.R.C.  5501.27. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Mandatory jail term has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(2)  Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2903.06. 
(3)  Construction zone has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  5501.27. 
(4)  Speeding offense has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2903.06. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former law of another state or the United States. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.08) 
537.03 - ASSAULT. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(b)  No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of assault, a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in subsection (c) hereof. If the assault was committed under the circumstances provided in subsection (c)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) or (9) hereof, assault is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the offense is committed by a caretaker against a functionally impaired person under the caretaker's care. 
(3)  If the offense occurs in or on the grounds of a state correctional institution or an institution of the Department of Youth Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction or the Department of Youth Services, and the offense is committed by a person incarcerated in the state correctional institution or by a person institutionalized in the Department of Youth Services Institution pursuant to a commitment to the Department of Youth Services. 
(4)  If the offense is committed in any of the following circumstances: 
A.  The offense occurs in or on the grounds of a local correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local correctional facility or a probation department or is on the premises of the facility for business purposes or as a visitor, and the offense is committed by a person who is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's arrest for any crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person's being charged with or convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person's being alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child. 
B.  The offense occurs off the grounds of a state correctional institution and off the grounds of an institution of the Department of Youth Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, the Department of Youth Services, or a probation department, the offense occurs during the employee's official work hours and while the employee is engaged in official work responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person incarcerated in a state correctional institution or institutionalized in the Department of Youth Services who temporarily is outside of the institution for any purpose, by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control, under a community control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person under post-release control, or by an offender under any other type of supervision by a government agency. 
C.  The offense occurs off the grounds of a local correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local correctional facility or a probation department, the offense occurs during the employee's official work hours and while the employee is engaged in official work responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person who is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's arrest for any crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person being charged with or convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person being alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child and who temporarily is outside of the facility for any purpose or by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control, under a community control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person under post-release control, or by an offender under any other type of supervision by a government agency. 
D.  The victim of the offense is a school teacher or administrator or a school bus operator, and the offense occurs in a school, on school premises, in a school building, on a school bus or while the victim is outside of school premises or a school bus and is engaged in duties or official responsibilities associated with the victim's employment or position as a school teacher or administrator or a school bus operator, including, but not limited to, driving, accompanying, or chaperoning students at or on class or field trips, athletic events, or other school extracurricular activities or functions outside of school premises. 
(5)  If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, a firefighter, or a person performing emergency medical service, while in the performance of their official duties. 
(6)  If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation and if the victim suffered serious physical harm as a result of the commission of the offense. 
(7)  If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties. 
(8)  If the victim of the offense is a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital whom the offender knows or has reasonable cause to know is a health care professional of a hospital; a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital, if the victim is engaged in the performance of the victim's duties, and if the hospital offers de-escalation or crisis intervention training for such professionals, workers or officers, assault is one of the following: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(8)B. of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding the fine specified in division (A)(2)(b) of O.R.C.  2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing the offender under this subsection and if the court decides to impose a fine, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $5,000.00. 
B.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed against hospital personnel, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a felony. 
(9)  If the victim of the offense is a judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or employee whom the offender knows or has reasonable cause to know is a judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or employee, and if the victim is engaged in the performance of the victim's duties, assault is one of the following: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(9)B. of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a misdemeanor of the first degree. In sentencing the offender under this subsection, if the court decides to impose a fine, notwithstanding the fine specified in division (A)(2)(b) of O.R.C.  2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the first degree, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $5,000.00. 
B.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed against justice system personnel, assault committed in the specified circumstances is a felony. 
(10)  If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as described in O.R.C.  2941.1423 that was included in the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in division (G) of O.R.C.  2929.24. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Peace officer has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2935.01. 
(2)  Firefighter has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3937.41. 
(3)  Emergency medical service has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4765.01. 
(4)  Local correctional facility means a county, multicounty, municipal, municipal-county or multicounty-municipal jail or workhouse. A minimum security jail established under O.R.C.  341.23 or 753.21, or another county, multicounty, municipal, municipal-county, or multicounty- municipal facility used for the custody of persons arrested for any crime or delinquent act, persons charged with or convicted of any crime, or persons alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child. 
(5)  Employee of a local correctional facility means a person who is an employee of the political subdivision or of one or more of the affiliated political subdivisions that operates the local correctional facility and who operates or assists in the operation of the facility. 
(6)  School teacher or administrator means either of the following: 
A.  A person who is employed in the public schools of the State under a contract described in O.R.C.  3311.77 or 3319.08 in a position in which the person is required to have a certificate issued pursuant to O.R.C.  3319.22 to 3319.311. 
B.  A person who is employed by a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07 and who is certified in accordance with O.R.C.  3301.071. 
(7)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(8)  Escorted visit means an escorted visit granted under O.R.C.  2967.27. 
(9)  Post-release control and transitional control have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2967.01. 
(10)  Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2903.11. 
(11)  Health care professional and health care worker have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2305.234. 
(12)  Assault or homicide offense committed against hospital personnel means a violation of this section or O.R.C.  2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14 committed in circumstances in which all of the following apply: 
A.  The victim of the offense was a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital or a security officer of a hospital. 
B.  The offender knew or had reasonable cause to know that the victim was a health care professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital; 
C.  The victim was engaged in the performance of the victim's duties. 
D.  The hospital offered de-escalation or crisis intervention training for such professionals, workers or officers. 
(13)  De-escalation or crisis intervention training means de-escalation or crisis intervention training for health care professionals of a hospital, health care workers of a hospital, and security officers of a hospital to facilitate interaction with patients, members of a patient's family, and visitors, including those with mental impairments. 
(14)  "Assault or homicide offense committed against justice system personnel" means a violation of this section or of O.R.C.  2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14 committed in circumstances in which the victim of the offense was a judge, magistrate, prosecutor, or court official or employee whom the offender knew or had reasonable cause to know was a judge, magistrate, prosecutor, or court official or employee, and the victim was engaged in the performance of the victim's duties. 
(15)  Court official or employee means any official or employee of a court created under the constitution or statutes of this state or of a United States court located in this state. 
(16)  Judge means a judge of a court created under the constitution or statutes of this state or of a United States court located in this state. 
(17)  Magistrate means an individual who is appointed by a court of record of this state and who has the powers and may perform the functions specified in Civil Rule 53, Criminal Rule 19, or Juvenile Rule 40, or an individual who is appointed by a United States court located in this state who has similar powers and functions. 
(18)  Prosecutor has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2935.01. 
(19)  A.  Hospital means, subject to subsection (d)(19)B. of this section, an institution classified as a hospital under O.R.C.  3701.01 in which are provided to patients diagnostic, medical, surgical, obstetrical, psychiatric, or rehabilitation care or a hospital operated by a health maintenance organization. 
B.  Hospital does not include any of the following: 
1.  A facility licensed under O.R.C. Ch. 3721, a health care facility operated by the Department of Mental Health or the Department of Developmental Disabilities, a health maintenance organization that does not operate a hospital, or the office of any private, licensed health care professional, whether organized for individual or group practice; 
2.  An institution for the sick that is operated exclusively for patients who use spiritual means for healing and for whom the acceptance of medical care is inconsistent with their religious beliefs, accredited by a national accrediting organization, exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501 of the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986", 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended, and providing 24-hour nursing care pursuant to the exemption in division (E) of O.R.C.  4723.32 from the licensing requirements of O.R.C. Ch. 4723. 
(20)  Health maintenance organization has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3727.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.13) 
537.04 - NEGLIGENT ASSAULT. 
(a)  No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section 549.01 cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.14) 
537.05 - AGGRAVATED MENACING. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(c)  As used in this section, "organization" includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.21) 
537.051 - MENACING BY STALKING. 
(a)  (1)  No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person's family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other person's family or household member, the other person's belief or mental distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(2)  No person, through the use of any form of written communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, any computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or telecommunication device shall post a message or use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of the following: 
A.  Violate subsection (a)(1) of this section; 
B.  Urge or incite another to commit a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by stalking. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)(2) and (3) of this section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  Menacing by stalking is a felony of the fourth degree if any of the following applies: 
A.  The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a violation of O.R.C.  2911.211. 
B.  In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim. 
C.  In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school. 
D.  The victim of the offense is a minor. 
E.  The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts toward the victim or any other person. 
F.  While committing the offense under subsection (a)(1) of this section or a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control. Subsection (b)(2)F. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty for a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section or a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
G.  At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was the subject of a protection order issued under O.R.C.  2903.213 or 2903.214, regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim of the offense or another person. 
H.  In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or, as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)(2) of this section or an offense committed under subsection (a)(3) of this section based on a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or any personal property on that premises. 
I.  Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness. 
(3)  If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing by stalking is either a felony of the fifth degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony of the fourth degree. 
(c)  Ohio Revised Code  2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a violation of this section. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Pattern of conduct means two or more actions or incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public official's, firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical services person's, or emergency facility person's official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or telecommunications device, may constitute a "pattern of conduct." 
(2)  Mental distress means any of the following: 
A.  Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary substantial incapacity; 
B.  Any mental illness or condition that would normally require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services. 
(3)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of "emergency medical services personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2133.21. 
(4)  Emergency facility person is the singular of "emergency facility personnel" as defined in O.R.C.  2909.04. 
(5)  Public official has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2921.01. 
(6)  Computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, and telecommunications device have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
(7)  Post a message means transferring, sending, posting, publishing, disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether done under one's own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating another. 
(8)  Third person means, in relation to conduct as described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of the conduct. 
(9)  Sexual motivation has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2971.01. 
(10)  Organization includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
(11)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
A.  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(1) of this section is committed: 
1.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of the person; 
2.  A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person; 
3.  A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person. 
B.  The natural parent of any child of whom the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(12)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
(e)  The state does not need to prove in a prosecution under this section that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to show that the person was caused mental distress as described in subsection (d)(2)B. of this section. 
(f)  (1)  This section does not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section. 
(2)  Subsection (f)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Subsection (f)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.211) 
537.06 - MENACING. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediately family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person belongs. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(c)  As used in this section, "organization" includes an entity that is a governmental employer. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2903.22) 
537.07 - ENDANGERING CHILDREN. 
(a)  No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under 21 years of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child, by violating a duty of care, protection or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care, protection or support under this subsection when the parent, guardian, custodian or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical or mental illness or defect of the child by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body. 
(b)  No person shall abuse a child under 18 years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under 21 years of age. 
(c)  (1)  No person shall operate a vehicle in violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code when one or more children under 18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of subsection (c) hereof and a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (c) hereof. For purposes of O.R.C.  4511.191-4511.197 and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of subsection (c) hereof shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. 
(2)  As used in subsection (c) hereof: 
A.  "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3719.01. 
B.  "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children. 
(1)  Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved, or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section, O.R.C.  2919.22 or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, endangering children is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Endangering children is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if either of the following applies: 
A.  The violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved or the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under O.R.C.  2919.22 or any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of, or physical abuse of a child. 
B.  The violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved and the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  2919.22(C) or subsection (c) hereof, O.R.C.  2903.06, or 2903.08, O.R.C.  2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or O.R.C.  2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section. 
(3)  In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (d)(2) hereof, or pursuant to any other provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender any of the sanctions provided under O.R.C.  2919.22(E)(5)(d). 
(e)  (1)  If a person violates subsection (c) hereof and if, at the time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a violation of subsection (c) hereof for each of the children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations. 
(2)  A.  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (c) hereof but the person is not also convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (c) hereof, both of the following apply: 
1.  For purposes of the provisions of the Traffic Code penalty that set forth the penalties and sanctions for a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (c) hereof shall not constitute a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code. 
2.  For purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code and that is not described in subsection (e)(2)A.1. hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (c) hereof shall constitute a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code. 
B.  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (c) hereof and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection (c) hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of subsection (c) hereof shall not constitute, for purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code, a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section 333.01(a) of the Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2919.22) 
537.08 - UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT. 
(a)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(b)  No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(d)  As used in this section, "sexual motivation" has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2971.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2905.03) 
537.09 - COERCION. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Threaten to commit any offense; 
(2)  Utter or threaten any calumny against any person; 
(3)  Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, to damage any person's personal or business repute, or to impair any person's credit; 
(4)  Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person; 
(5)  Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(4) and (5) hereof shall not be construed to prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith and in the interest of justice: 
(1)  Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from prosecution pursuant to O.R.C.  2945.44; 
(2)  In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification of sentence; 
(3)  Imposing community control sanction on certain conditions, including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim of the offense. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3), (4) or (5) hereof that the actor's conduct was a reasonable response to the circumstances that occasioned it, and that the actor's purpose was limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from further misconduct; 
(2)  Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice; 
(3)  Preventing another from taking action for which the actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified; 
(4)  Compelling another to take action that the actor reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Threat includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo. 
(2)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2905.12) 
537.10 - TELECOMMUNICATION HARASSMENT. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or knowingly permit telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the caller does any of the following: 
(1)  Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or abuse, any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a recipient; 
(2)  Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made; 
(3)  During the telecommunication, violates O.R.C.  2903.21; 
(4)  Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged; 
(5)  Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a telecommunication to those premises or to any person at those premises. 
(6)  Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass the recipient; 
(7)  Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the telecommunication service of any person; 
(8)  Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety, any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using the person's telephone service or electronic communication device; 
(9)  Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient; 
(10)  Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person; 
(11)  Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner. 
(b)  (1)  No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another person. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing, threatening, or harassing another person. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunication harassment. 
(2)  A violation of subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) or (5) or (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. Each subsequent offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(3)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense. For each subsequent offense or if a violation of subsection (a)(4) hereof results in economic harm of $1,000.00 or more, a violation of subsection (a)(4) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this state against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunication service, interactive computer service as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, or an officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, is immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. 
(e)  (1)  This section does not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section. 
(2)  Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature. 
(4)  A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider, as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or development of information provided by another information content provider, as defined in section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code. Nothing in this division shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or created any content in violation of this section. 
(f)  Subsections (a)(5) to (11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within the scope of the person's employment in that capacity or the person's contractual authority in that capacity. 
(g)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Economic harm means all direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct. "Economic harm" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
A.  All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct; 
B.  The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct; 
C.  The overhead costs incurred for the time that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; 
D.  The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct. 
(2)  Caller means the person described in subsection (a) hereof who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that person's control. 
(3)  Telecommunication and telecommunications device have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
(4)  Sexual activity has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2907.01. 
(5)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
A.  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed: 
1.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of the recipient; 
2.  A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient; 
3.  A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient. 
B.  The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(6)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
(7)  Cable operator has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  1332.21. 
(h)  Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a telecommunication call to a debtor that is in compliance with the "Fair Debt Collection Practices Act," 91 Stat. 874 (1977), 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or the "Telephone Consumer Protection Act," 105 Stat. 2395 (1991), 47 U.S.C. 227, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2917.21) 
537.11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former O.R.C.  4931.31 from which Section 537.11 was derived was repealed by Senate Bill 162, effective September 13, 2010. See now Section 537.10 "Telecommunication Harassment".) 
537.12 - MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM. 
(a)  9-1-1 system means a system through which individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  128.01) 
(b)  No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of the 9-1-1 system established under O.R.C. Ch. 128 to report an emergency if he knows that no emergency exists. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than obtaining emergency service. 
(d)  No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the data base that serves the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under O.R.C. Ch. 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system; 
(2)  For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency service provider; 
(3)  In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such information due solely to technology of the wireline telephone network portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the data base to be restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point; 
(4)  In the circumstance of access to a data base being given by a telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a public utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a data base shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the steering committee. 
(5)  In the circumstance of access to a data base given by a telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the steering committee. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for the purpose of access to a data base is subject to the jurisdiction of the steering committee. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  128.32) 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. For each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  128.99) 
537.13 - ADULTERATING OF OR FURNISHING ADULTERATED FOOD OR CONFECTION. 
(a)  No person shall do either of the following, knowingly or having reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby: 
(1)  Place a pin, needle, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection; 
(2)  Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been adulterated in violation of subsection (a)(1) hereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3716.11) 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3716.99(C)) 
537.14 - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a family or household member. 
(b)  No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or household member. 
(c)  No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm to the family or household member. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) to (5) of this section, a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(4) of this section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially similar to domestic violence, a violation of O.R.C.  2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially similar to any of those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(4)  If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in subsection (d)(3) of this section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) or (4) of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit of local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person violated this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Family or household member means any of the following: 
A.  Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the offender: 
1.  A spouse, a person living as a spouse or a former spouse of the offender; 
2.  A parent, a foster parent or a child of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender; 
3.  A parent, or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the offender; or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the offender. 
B.  The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. 
(2)  Person living as a spouse means a person who is living or has lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2919.25) 
(g)  The same relief available under the Ohio Revised Code for filing a complaint for violation of O.R.C.  2919.25 shall be available for filing a complaint for violation of this section. 
537.15 - TEMPORARY PROTECTION ORDER. 
(a)  No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following: 
(1)  A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to O.R.C.  2919.26 or 3113.31; 
(2)  A protection order issued pursuant to O.R.C.  2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214; 
(3)  A protection order issued by a court of another state. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a protection order. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Violating a protection order is a felony of the fifth degree if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following: 
A.  A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to O.R.C.  2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31; 
B.  Two or more violations of O.R.C.  2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or 2911.211, or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent agreement; 
C.  One or more violations of this section. 
(4)  If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(5)  If the protection order violated by the offender was an order issued pursuant to O.R.C.  2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this subsection that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the court determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under O.R.C.  2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to O.R.C.  2743.191. The total amount paid from the reparations fund created pursuant to O.R.C.  2743.191 for electronic monitoring under this section and O.R.C.  2151.34 and 2903.214 shall not exceed $300,000.00 per year. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3) of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a protection order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265(c). 
(d)  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement. 
(e)  As used in this section, "protection order issued by a court of another state" means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to another person, including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a complaint, petition, or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking protection. "Protection order issued by a court of another state" does not include an order for support or for custody of a child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state, except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2919.27) 
537.16 - ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR ALTERNATE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Age verification means a service provided by an independent third party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or older. 
(2)  A.  Alternative nicotine product means, subject to subsection (a)(2)B. of this section, an electronic cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means, including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving or inhaling. 
B.  Alternative nicotine product does not include any of the following: 
1.  Any cigarette or other tobacco product; 
2.  Any product that is a "drug" as that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1); 
3.  Any product that is a "device" as that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(h); 
4.  Any product that is a "combination product" as described in 21 U.S.C. 353(g). 
(3)  Child has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2151.011. 
(4)  Cigarette includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes. 
(5)  Distribute means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes. 
(6)  A.  Electronic cigarette means, subject to subsection (a)(6)B. of this section, any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic pipe. 
B.  Electronic cigarette does not include any item, product or device described in subsections (a)(2)B.1. to 4. of this section. 
(7)  Person under 21 means, for purposes of this section, a person who has reached the age of 18 years but has not yet reached the age of 21 years. 
(8)  Proof of age means a driver's license, a commercial driver's license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued under O.R.C.  4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of age or older. 
(9)  Tobacco product means any product that is made from tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff. 
(10)  Vending machine has the same meaning as "coin machine" in O.R.C.  2913.01. 
(b)  No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to any child; 
(2)  Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age is prohibited by law; 
(3)  Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age or other identification of any child or person under 21 with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes for that child or person under 21; 
(4)  Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack or other container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco; 
(5)  Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer; 
(6)  Give, sell or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age verification. 
(7)  Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to any person under 21. 
(c)  No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except in the following locations: 
(1)  An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not open to the general public; 
(2)  An area to which children are not generally permitted access; 
(3)  Any other place not identified in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, upon all of the following conditions: 
A.  The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product and alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway or outer-waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person. 
B.  The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place is closed. 
(d)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(7) of this section: 
(1)  The child or person under 21 was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child. 
(2)  The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a child or to a person under 21 under division (b)(7) of this section under subsection (b)(1) of this section is a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child or person under 21 under division (b)(7) of this section. 
(e)  It is not a violation of subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(7) of this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child or person under 21 cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes while the child or person under 21 is participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol, or the person under 21 has consented in writing on his or her own behalf; 
(2)  An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol; 
(3)  The child or person under 21 is participating in the research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research protocol. 
(f)  It is not a violation of (b)(7) of this section to give a person under 21 cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes if the transfer is done in the course of the person under 21 employment and the person under 21 is not the end consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes. 
(g)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (c) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (b)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (c) of this section, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (b)(3) of this section is guilty of permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(3)  Whoever violates division (b)(7) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to a person under 21 shall be an unclassified misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500.00. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of any division of this section, or a substantially equivalent offense, then violation of division (b)(7) of this section shall be an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of no less than $300.00, which shall not be suspended, and up to $750.00. If the offender has two or more previous convictions under this section, or for any substantially equivalent offense, then a violation of division (b)(7) shall be an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of no less than $750.00, which shall not be suspended, and up to $1,000.00. 
(4)  It is the purpose of this section to impose organizational liability for violation of division (b)(7) of this section. Such liability shall apply to the corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity or natural person acting as the principal or employer to the agent or employee who actually sells, gives, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21. It shall be the policy of the City of Powell to prefer citation of the organization selling, distributing, or otherwise giving cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21. Provided, however, that this shall not preclude citation of an individual agent or employee for violation of division (b)(7). 
(h)  Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold or otherwise distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are used, possessed, purchased or received by a child in violation of O.R.C.  2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under O.R.C. Ch. 2981. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24,  1, 6-20-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2927.02) 
537.17 - CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT. 
(a)  No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the activity. 
(2)  The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of, any board of education, or the actor is any of such persons, but, at the time the actor undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the actor's lawful duties in that capacity. 
(b)  No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to, that proscribed by subsection (a) of this section, shall engage in any activity described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a) of this section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the child. 
(e)  Whoever violates subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section is guilty of criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, O.R.C.  2907.02 or 2907.03 or former O.R.C.  2907.12, or O.R.C.  2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony of the fifth degree. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Sexual motivation has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2971.01. 
(2)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
(3)  Vessel has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  1546.01. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2905.05) 
537.18 - CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD. 
(a)  No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child as defined in O.R.C.  2151.022, or a delinquent child as defined in O.R.C.  2152.02. 
(2)  Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile court to become an unruly child as defined in O.R.C.  2151.022 or a delinquent child as defined in O.R.C.  2152.02. 
(3)  If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who has the duties under O.R.C. Chs. 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence address and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not emancipated, as defined in O.R.C.  2919.121, fail to ensure that the child complies with those duties under O.R.C. Chs. 2152 and 2950. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of violation of this section is a separate offense. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2919.24) 
537.19 - EXPUNGEMENT OF RECORDS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING VICTIM FOUND NOT GUILTY OR AGAINST WHOM CHARGES ARE DISMISSED. 
(a)  As used in this section, "expunge" has the same meaning as in section 2953.38 of the Revised Code. 
(b)  Any person who is found not guilty of an offense by a jury or a court or who is the defendant named in a dismissed complaint, indictment, or information may apply to the court for an order to expunge the person's official records in the case if the complaint, indictment, information, or finding of not guilty that is the subject of the application was the result of the applicant having been a victim of human trafficking. The application may be filed at any time after the finding of not guilty or the dismissal of the complaint, indictment, or information is entered upon the minutes of the court or the journal, whichever entry occurs first. The application may request an order to expunge official records for more than one offense, but if it does, the court shall consider the request for each offense separately as if a separate application had been made for each offense and all references in divisions (b) to (h) of this section to "the offense" or "that offense" mean each of those offenses that are the subject of the application. 
(c)  The court may deny an application made under division (b) of this section if it finds that the application fails to assert grounds on which relief may be granted. 
(d)  If the court does not deny an application under division (c) of this section, the court shall set a date for a hearing and shall notify the prosecutor for the case of the hearing on the application. The prosecutor may object to the granting of the application by filing an objection with the court prior to the date set for the hearing. The prosecutor shall specify in the objection the reasons for believing a denial of the application is justified. 
(e)  At the hearing held under division (d) of this section, the court shall do all of the following: 
(1)  If the prosecutor has filed an objection, consider the reasons against granting the application specified by the prosecutor in the objection; 
(2)  Determine whether the applicant has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the complaint, indictment, information, or finding of not guilty that is the subject of the application was the result of the applicant having been a victim of human trafficking; 
(3)  If the application pertains to a dismissed complaint, indictment, or information, determine whether the dismissal was with prejudice or without prejudice and, if the dismissal was without prejudice, whether the period of limitations applicable to the offense that was the subject of that complaint, indictment, or information has expired; 
(4)  Determine whether any criminal proceedings are pending against the applicant. 
(f)  (1)  Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, if the court finds that the applicant has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the complaint, indictment, information, or finding of not guilty that is the subject of the application was the result of the applicant having been a victim of human trafficking, the court shall grant the application and order that the official records be expunged. 
(2)  The court shall not grant the application and order that the official records be expunged unless the court determines that the interests of the applicant in having the official records pertaining to the complaint, indictment, or information or finding of not guilty that is the subject of the application expunged are not outweighed by any legitimate needs of the government to maintain those records. 
(g)  If an expungement is ordered under division (f) of this section, the court shall send notice of the order of expungement to each public office or agency that the court has reason to believe may have an official record pertaining to the case. 
(h)  The proceedings in the case that is the subject of an order issued under division (f) of this section shall be considered not to have occurred and the official records shall be expunged. The official records shall not be used for any purpose, including a criminal records check under section 109.572 of the Revised Code. The applicant may, and the court shall, reply that no record exists with respect to the applicant upon any inquiry into the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-49 ,  5, 11-7-2018) 
537.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 541 - PROPERTY OFFENSES[11] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Physical harm to property defined,  501.01(d), (f); Reimbursement for investigation or prosecution costs,  501.99(a); Damage to sidewalks,  521.04; Vehicle trespass,  545.06 
State Law reference- Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children, O.R.C.  3109.09 

541.01 - DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON. 
(a)  The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of Section 541.02. 
(1)  If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss. 
(2)  If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) hereof, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is the reasonable cost of restoring the property. 
(3)  If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) hereof, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property immediately before and immediately after the offense. 
(b)  As used in this section, "fair market value" has the same meaning as in Section 545.02(c)(3). 
(c)  Prima-facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Section 545.02(d) may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this section. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.11(B)-(D)) 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
541.02 - ARSON. 
(a)  No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent. 
(b)  This section does not apply if the violation is done with purpose to defraud or the property involved is a statehouse or a courthouse, school building or other building or structure that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any department, agency or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision, and that is used for public purposes. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or the amount of physical harm involved is $1,000.00 or more, arson is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.03) 
541.03 - CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING. 
(a)  No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without his consent: 
(1)  Knowingly, by any means; 
(2)  Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently dangerous agency or substance. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor if the property involved is not an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation does not create a risk of physical harm to any person, and if the property involved is not an occupied aircraft. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.06) 
541.04 - CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with either of the following: 
A.  The property of another; 
B.  One's own residential real property with the purpose to decrease the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the following apply: 
1.  The residential real property is subject to a mortgage. 
2.  The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real property. As used in this division, "pending" includes the time between judgment entry and confirmation of sale. 
(2)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of another employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm; 
(3)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station, boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker. 
(4)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its intended purpose; 
(5)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that is on that land. 
(6)  Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program, all as defined in O.R.C.  2909.01, knowingly do any of the following: 
A.  In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program; 
B.  Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer program. 
(b)  As used in this section, "safety device" means any fire extinguisher, fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of danger, or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and shall be punished as provided in subsection (c)(2) or (3) of this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved in the violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the violation is $1,000.00 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6, 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.07)(2) 
541.05 - CRIMINAL TRESPASS. 
(a)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another; 
(2)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard; 
(3)  Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict access; 
(4)  Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either. 
(b)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or premises involved was owned, controlled or in custody of a public agency. 
(c)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved when such authorization was secured by deception. 
(d)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Notwithstanding Section 501.99, if the person, in committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 
(3)  If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or state law, and the offender, in committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, O.R.C.  4519.47 applies. 
(e)  As used in this section: 
(1)  All-purpose vehicle, off-highway motorcycle and snowmobile have the same meaning as in Section 375.01 of the Traffic Code. 
(2)  Land or premises includes any land, building, structure, or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2911.21) 
541.051 - AGGRAVATED TRESPASS. 
(a)  No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2911.211) 
541.06 - DESTRUCTION OF SHRUBS, TREES OR CROPS. 
(a)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down, destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty provided, whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury caused. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  901.51) 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  901.99(A)) 
541.07 - DESECRATION. 
(a)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage, pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following: 
(1)  The flag of the United States or of this state; 
(2)  Any public monument; 
(3)  Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or archeological interest; 
(4)  A work of art or museum piece; 
(5)  Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(c)  As used in this section, cemetery means any place of burial and includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with or containing American Indian human remains. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2927.11) 
541.08 - ETHNIC INTIMIDATION. 
(a)  No person shall violate O.R.C.  2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, 2909.07 or 2917.21(A)(3) to (5) or Sections 537.05, 537.06, 537.10(a)(3) to (5), 541.03 or 541.04 of the General Offenses Code by reason of the race, color, religion or national origin of another person or group of persons. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2927.12) 
541.09 - ADVERTISING UPON POLES, TREES OR FENCES. 
(a)  No person shall attach to any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power pole, tree or fence within the corporate limits of the City, any signs, bills, cards or other advertising matter, or otherwise to mark or deface same. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4, 11-11-1947) 
541.10 - VEHICULAR VANDALISM. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Highway means any highway as defined in Section 301.42 of the Traffic Code or any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass. 
(2)  Alley, street, streetcar, trackless trolley, and vehicle have the same meanings as in Chapter 301 of the Traffic Code. 
(3)  Vessel and waters in this state have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  1546.01. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley on a highway; 
(2)  Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this section creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, serious physical harm to property, physical harm to any person or serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(Ord. No. 4, 11-11-1947; Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.09) 
(Ord. No. 4, 11-11-1947) 
541.11 - TRESPASS ON A PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT. 
(a)  As used in this section, place of public amusement means a stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of whether admission is charged. 
(b)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement. 
(c)  An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This subsection does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement. 
(d)  (1)  Notice has been given that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this subsection, regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following means: 
A.  By notifying the person personally, either orally or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is restricted; 
B.  By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the public place of amusement is restricted. 
(2)  If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the Municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of subsection (b) of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service work. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2911.23) 
541.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 545 - THEFT AND FRAUD[12] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Property defined,  501.01(j); Cheating,  517.05; Falsification,  525.02; Impersonating a public servant,  525.03 

545.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires that a term be given a different meaning: 
    Active duty service member means any member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code. 
    Anhydrous ammonia is a compound formed by the combination of two gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described in this subsection. Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is approximately 82 percent nitrogen to 18 percent hydrogen. 
    Assistance dog has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  955.011. 
    Cable television service means any services provided by or through the facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system. 
    Coin machine means any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the following: 
(1)  Receive a coin, bill, or token made for that purpose; 
(2)  In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license. 
    Computer means an electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. "Computer" includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing, storage, computer program or communication facilities that are connected or related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature. 
    Computer network means a set of related and remotely connected computers and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication facilities through the use of computer facilities. 
    Computer program means an ordered set of data representing coded instructions or statements that when executed by a computer cause the computer to process data. 
    Computer services includes, but is not limited to, the use of a computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network. 
    Computer software means computer programs, procedures and other documentation associated with the operation of a computer system. 
    Computer system means a computer and related devices, whether connected or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and storage devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing tasks. 
    Counterfeit telecommunications device means a telecommunications device that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications service or information service. "Counterfeit telecommunications device" includes, but is not limited to, a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone. 
    Credit card includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a cash dispensing machine. 
    Data means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network. For purposes of Section 545.07, "data" has the additional meaning set forth in subsection (a) of that section. 
    Dangerous drug has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
    Deception means knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be deceived, by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact. 
    Defraud means to knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another. 
    Deprive means to do any of the following: 
(1)  Withhold property of another permanently, or for such period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration; 
(2)  Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will recover it; 
(3)  Accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper consideration. 
    Disabled adult means a person who is 18 years of age or older and has some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unfit to work at any substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of at least twelve months without any present indication of recovery from the impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United States that has the function of so classifying persons. 
    Drug abuse offense has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2925.01. 
    Electronic fund transfer has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15 U.S.C.A. 1693a, as amended. 
    Elderly person means a person who is 65 years of age or older. 
    Firearm and dangerous ordnance have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2923.11. 
    Forge means to fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not authenticated by that conduct. 
    Gain access means to approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer, computer system or computer network. 
    Information service means, subject to subsection (1) hereof, the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications, including, but not limited to, electronic publishing. 
(1)  Information service does not include any use of a capability of a type described in this subsection hereof for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service. 
    Motor vehicle has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4501.01. 
    Owner means, unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership, possession, control, license or interest is unlawful. 
    Police dog or horse has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2921.321. 
    Rented property means personal property in which the right of possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the property, within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of consideration generally is determined by the duration of possession of the property. 
    Services include labor, personal services, professional services, rental services, public utility services, including wireless service as defined in O.R.C.  4931.40(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation, entertainment and cable television services. 
    Slug means an object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose. 
    Telecommunication means the origination, emission, dissemination, transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence or any nature over any communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or analog method. 
    Telecommunications device means any instrument, equipment, machine, or other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem. 
    Telecommunications service means the providing, allowing, facilitating, or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a telecommunications device over a telecommunications system. 
    Theft offense means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of O.R.C.  2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42-2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, 2913.51, 2915.05, 2915.06, or 2921.41. 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in subsection (1) hereof or a violation of O.R.C.  2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996; 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; 
(4)  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under subsection (1), (2) or (3) hereof. 
    Utter means to issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation, deliver or display. 
    Writing means any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written, typewritten or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge, trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or identification. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.01) 
545.02 - DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE. 
(a)  If more than one item of property or service is involved in a theft offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property or services involved in the offense. 
(b)  (1)  When a series of offenses under Section 545.05, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Section 545.05, 545.06, or 545.08, 545.10(b)(1) or (2), or Section 545.15 or 545.20 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, is committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under Section 545.05, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 545.05 or 545.15 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member is committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series. 
(2)  If an offender commits a series of offenses under Section 545.05 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Section 545.05, 545.06 or 545.08, Section 545.10(b)(1) or (2), or Section 545.15 or 545.20, whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Section 545.05 or 545.15, whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct. 
(3)  In prosecuting a single offense under subsection (b)(1) or (2), it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses in the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section or that involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section. While it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under subsection (b)(1) or (2) hereof, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution. 
(c)  The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or services involved in a theft offense: 
(1)  The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic worth to its owner and that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss. 
(2)  The value of personal effects and household goods, and of materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business, trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered under subsection (c)(1) hereof, and which retains substantial utility for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind and quality. 
(3)  The value of any real or personal property that is not covered under subsections (c)(1) or (2) hereof, and the value of services, is the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section, "fair market value" is the money consideration that a buyer would give and a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to act. 
(d)  Without limitation on the evidence that may be used to establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense: 
(1)  When the property involved is personal property held for sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima-facie evidence of its value. 
(2)  When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price, given in the latest market quotation prior to the offense, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity. 
(3)  When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest local market price prior to the offense is prima-facie evidence of the value of the livestock, poultry or products. 
(4)  When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face value is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(5)  When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive the property, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(6)  When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of the property or services that may be received by the instrument, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument. 
(7)  When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone, transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by law, the duly established rate is prima-facie evidence of the value of the services. 
(8)  When the services involved are services for which the rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima-facie evidence of the value of the services. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.61) 
545.03 - PROPERTY EXCEPTIONS AS FELONY OFFENSE. 
    Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether the offender has previously been convicted of a theft offense, the provisions of Section 545.05 or 545.18 do not apply if the property involved is any of the following: 
(a)  A credit card; 
(b)  A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank; 
(c)  A firearm or dangerous ordnance as defined in O.R.C.  2923.11; 
(d)  A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed by O.R.C.  4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard or sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States; 
(e)  A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by O.R.C.  4505.07; 
(f)  A blank form for any license listed in O.R.C.  4507.01(A). 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.71) 
545.04 - DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS; RIGHTS OF MUSEUMS AND LIBRARIES. 
(a)  A merchant, or his employee or agent, who has probable cause to believe that items offered for sale by a mercantile establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (c) hereof, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity. 
(b)  Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (c) hereof or for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person has acted in a manner described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) hereof, detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the immediate vicinity of the library, museum or archival institution, if the officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has either: 
(1)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged, destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or 
(2)  With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat. 
(c)  An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival institution pursuant to subsection (b) hereof or a merchant or his employee or agent pursuant to subsection (a) hereof may detain another person for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief or theft; 
(2)  To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer; 
(3)  To obtain a warrant of arrest. 
(4)  To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of this General Offenses or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution or merchant. 
(d)  The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival institution, or the merchant or his employee or agent acting under subsection (a) or (b) hereof shall not search the person, search or seize any property belonging to the person detained without the person's consent, or use undue restraint upon the person detained. 
(e)  Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that he has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in subsection (b)(1) or (2) hereof or that he has probable cause to believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment. An arrest under this subsection shall be made within a reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking. 
(f)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Archival institution " means any public or private building, structure or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the materials. 
(2)  Museum means any public or private nonprofit institution that is permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the public the objects or items. 
(3)  Pretrial diversion program means a rehabilitative, educational program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this state. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2935.041) 
545.05 - PETTY THEFT. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in any of the following ways: 
(1)  Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(2)  Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(3)  By deception; 
(4)  By threat; 
(5)  By intimidation. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of petty theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Petty theft is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if: 
(1)  The value of the property or services stolen is $1,000.00 or more; or 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, or 
(3)  The property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, or 
(4)  The property stolen is a motor vehicle, or 
(5)  The property stolen is any dangerous drug, or 
(6)  The property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, or 
(7)  The property stolen is anhydrous ammonia, or 
(8)  The property stolen is a special purpose article as defined in O.R.C.  4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in O.R.C.  4737.012. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties described in subsection (b) of this section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court may do one of the following: 
(1)  Unless subsection (c)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not more than six months the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege; 
(2)  If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section, impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in O.R.C.  4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be for at least six months. 
(3)  The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to subsections (c)(1) or (2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties described in subsection (b) hereof, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution pursuant to O.R.C.  2929.18 or 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented. Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of O.R.C.  2913.72. 
(e)  The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or nonresident operating privilege under subsection (c) of this section may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in accordance with O.R.C. Ch. 4510. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.02) 
545.06 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(b)  This section does not apply to property removed from the state or if possession is kept for more than 48 hours. 
(c)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section: 
(1)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken, reasonably believed that the actor was authorized to use or operate the property. 
(2)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to use or operate the property. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly enter into or upon a motor vehicle, motorcycle or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(e)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of unauthorized use of a vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of subsection (a) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.03) 
(f)  Whoever violates subsection (d) hereof is guilty of vehicle trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
545.07 - INSURANCE FRAUD. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Data has the same meaning as in Section 545.01 and additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner. 
(2)  Deceptive means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information or by any other conduct, act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other objective or subjective fact. 
(3)  Insurer means any person that is authorized to engage in the business of insurance in this state under Title XXXIX of the Ohio Revised Code; The Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting Association created under O.R.C.  3929.43; any health insuring corporation; and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or members. 
(4)  Policy means a policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by an insurer. 
(5)  Statement includes, but is not limited to, any notice, letter or memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice, account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental chart or other record; X-Ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result; other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and data in any form. 
(b)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive; 
(2)  Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000.00 or more, insurance fraud is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify O.R.C.  2317.02(A). 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.47) 
545.08 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(b)  The affirmative defenses contained in Section 545.06(c) are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of property. Except as provided in subsection (d) hereof, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(d)  If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Unauthorized use of property is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if: 
(1)  Unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, and if the value of the property is $1,000.00 or more; or 
(2)  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.04) 
545.09 - PASSING BAD CHECKS. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Check includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account, including, but not limited to any of the following: 
A.  A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument; 
B.  An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form of automated clearing house transaction. 
(2)  Issue a check means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account. 
(b)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored, if either of the following occurs: 
(1)  The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of issue or the stated date, whichever is later. 
(2)  The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to defraud if the drawer fails to comply with O.R.C.  1349.16 by doing any of the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family or household purposes at a financial institution: 
(1)  Falsely stating that the drawer has not been issued a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued under O.R.C.  4507.50; 
(2)  Furnishing such license or card, or another identification document that contains false information; 
(3)  Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the financial institution. 
(e)  In determining the value of the payment for purposes of subsection (f) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or transferred in violation of subsection (a) of this section within a period of 180 consecutive days. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person for the payment of $1,000.00 or more or if the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500.00 or more, passing bad checks is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.11) 
545.10 - MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon; 
(2)  Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than the issuer. 
(b)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt; 
(2)  Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in violation of law; 
(3)  Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law; 
(4)  Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation is false. 
(c)  No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive, possess, control or dispose of a credit card. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Misuse of credit cards is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if: 
(1)  The cumulative retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations of subsection (b)(2), (3) or (4) hereof, which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000.00 or more; or 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and the offense involves a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (2) hereof. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.21) 
545.11 - MAKING OR USING SLUGS. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to defraud; 
(2)  Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.33) 
545.12 - TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument into any coin machine. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  2911.32 or of any theft offense, tampering with coin machines is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2911.32) 
545.13 - CRIMINAL SIMULATION. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in fact possess; 
(2)  Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape; 
(3)  Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under O.R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under O.R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under O.R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303. 
(4)  Utter, or possess with purpose to utter, any object that the person knows to have been simulated as provided in subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000.00 or more, criminal simulation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.32) 
545.14 - TAMPERING WITH RECORDS. 
(a)  No person, knowing the person has no privilege to do so, and with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record; 
(2)  Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with as provided in subsection (a)(1) hereof. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation involves data or computer software the value of which or loss to the victim is $1,000.00 or more, or if the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the offense, tampering with records is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.42) 
545.15 - SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION. 
(a)  No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is incurred. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by deception, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Securing writings by deception is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if: 
(1)  The value of the property or obligation involved is $1,000.00 or more; or 
(2)  The victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.43) 
545.16 - PERSONATING AN OFFICER. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he is facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector, investigator or agent of any governmental agency. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.44) 
545.17 - DEFRAUDING CREDITORS. 
(a)  No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of the person's creditors, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with any of the person's property. 
(2)  Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to administer or manage the person's affairs or estate, the existence, amount or location of any of the person's property, or any other information regarding such property that the person is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is $1,000.00 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.45) 
545.18 - RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY. 
(a)  No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been obtained through commission of a theft offense. 
(b)  It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a theft offense. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Receiving stolen property is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if: 
(1)  The value of the property involved is $1,000.00 or more; or 
(2)  The property involved is: 
A.  Listed in Section 545.03; or 
B.  A motor vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  4501.01; or 
C.  A dangerous drug as defined in O.R.C.  4729.01. 
D.  A special purchase article as defined in O.R.C.  4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in O.R.C.  4737.012. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.51) 
545.19 - POSSESSION OF CRIMINAL TOOLS. 
(a)  No person shall possess or have under the person's control any substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally. 
(b)  Each of the following constitutes prima-facie evidence of criminal purpose: 
(1)  Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials or parts for making dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials, or parts are intended for legitimate use; 
(2)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article designed or specially adapted for criminal use; 
(3)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.24) 
545.20 - FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly do either of the following: 
(1)  Forge an identification card; 
(2)  Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an identification card, knowing it to have been forged. 
(3)  As used in this section, identification card means a card that includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether the words "identity," "identification," "identification card" or other similar words appear on the card. 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, forging or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or O.R.C.  2913.31(B), forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than $250.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2913.31) 
545.21 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 545.21, which pertained to identity fraud, has been deleted from the Codified Ordinances. O.R.C.  2913.49, from which Section 545.21 was derived, has been reclassified from a misdemeanor to a felony offense. 
545.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 549 - WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES[13] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Hunting prohibited,  505.11; Reporting gunshot and stab wounds,  525.05(b); Property destruction by tear gas device, etc.,  541.04 
State Law reference- License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, O.R.C.  2923.18 

549.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(a)  Deadly weapon means any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried or used as a weapon. 
(b)  (1)  Firearm means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. "Firearm" includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable. 
(2)  When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual exercising control over the firearm. 
(c)  Handgun means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand; 
(2)  Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described in subsection (c)(1) of this section can be assembled. 
(d)  Semi-automatic firearm means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger. 
(e)  Automatic firearm means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger. 
(f)  Sawed-off firearm means a shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than 26 inches long overall. 
(g)  Zip-gun means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture; 
(2)  Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, that is not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm; 
(3)  Any industrial tool, signalling device or safety device, that is not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when possessed, carried or used as a firearm. 
(h)  Explosive device means any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. "Explosive device" includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode. 
(i)  Incendiary device means any firebomb, and any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite it. 
(j )  Ballistic knife means a knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
(k)  Dangerous ordnance means any of the following, except as provided in subsection (l) hereof: 
(1)  Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife; 
(2)  Any explosive device or incendiary device; 
(3)  Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT, picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating or demolitions; 
(4)  Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon; 
(5)  Any firearm muffler or suppressor; 
(6)  Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance. 
(l)  Dangerous ordnance does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with black powder; 
(2)  Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the ammunition for that weapon unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off firearm; 
(3)  Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for use only with black powder; 
(4)  Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection (l)(3) hereof during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition; 
(5)  Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir, curio or museum piece. 
(6)  Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968," 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C.921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act. 
(m)  Explosive means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. "Explosive" includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. "Explosive" does not include "fireworks", as defined in O.R.C.  3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in O.R.C.  3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of O.R.C.  3743.80, and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to O.R.C.  3737.82. 
(n)  (1)  Concealed handgun license or license to carry a concealed handgun means, subject to subsection (n)(2) of this section, a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under O.R.C.  2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under O.R.C.  109.69. 
(2)  A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued under O.R.C.  2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued under O.R.C.  2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued under O.R.C.  2923.1213, a licence to carry a concealed handgun issued under O.R.C.  2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is specified in O.R.C.  2923.1213. A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under O.R.C.  109.69. 
(o)  Valid concealed handgun license or valid license to carry a concealed handgun means a concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under a suspension under division (A)(1) of O.R.C.  2923.128, under O.R.C.  2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other than this State in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked under division (B)(1) of O.R.C.  2923.128, under O.R.C.  2923.1213 or under a revocation provision of the state other than this State in which the license was issued. 
(p)  Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating to the regulation of business practices; 
(2)  Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two years or less. 
(q)  Alien registration number means the number issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien's permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the "USCIS number" or the "alien number." 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.11) 
549.02 - CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following: 
(1)  A deadly weapon other than a handgun; 
(2)  A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; 
(3)  A dangerous ordnance. 
(b)  No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun; 
(2)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(c)  (1)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
A.  An officer, agent or employee or this or any other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance, or is authorized to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties; 
B.  Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of O.R.C.  109.801 unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in subsection (c)(1)B. hereof does not apply to the person. 
C.  A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of O.R.C.  2923.11 in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor's person; 
D.  A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of O.R.C.  2923.11 in the actor's own home for any lawful purpose. 
(2)  Subsection (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, is carrying a valid concealed handgun license, unless the person knowingly is in a place described in division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.126. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(1) of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies: 
(1)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(2)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(3)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home. 
(e)  No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(f)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsection (f)(2) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsection (f)(2) of this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (a) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section, if the weapon involved is a firearm and the violation of this section is committed at premises for which a D permit has been issued under O.R.C. Ch. 4303 or if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (a) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  If a person being arrested for a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.126, the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that subsection. If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun license and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that subsection, and the offender shall be punished as follows: 
A.  The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of the following apply: 
1.  Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer. 
2.  At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.126. 
B.  The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined $500.00 if all of the following apply: 
1.  The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun license and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding the arrest. 
2.  Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents any type of concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in O.R.C.  2945.71. 
3.  At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.126. 
C.  If neither subsection (f)(2)A. nor B. of this section applies, the offender shall be punished under subsection (f)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (b)(1) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (b)(1) hereof, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  2923.128(A)(2). 
If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of O.R.C.  2923.128. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided herein, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of O.R.C.  2923.12(B)(2) or (B)(4) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, carrying concealed weapons is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) hereof, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  2923.128(A)(2). 
(g)  If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this subsection, division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.163 applies. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.12) 
549.03 - USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED. 
(a)  No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.15) 
549.04 - IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways: 
(1)  In a closed package, box or case; 
(2)  In a compartment which can be reached only by leaving the vehicle; 
(3)  In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the purpose; 
(4)  If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight. 
(b)  No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in O.R.C.  5503.34, and who is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle. 
(3)  Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(c)  (1)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
A.  An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties; 
B.  Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of O.R.C.  109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in subsection (c)(1)B. does not apply to the person. 
(2)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person who transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, both of the following apply: 
A.  The person transporting or possessing the handgun is carrying a valid concealed handgun license. 
B.  The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.126. 
(3)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of the following apply: 
A.  The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle permit issued under O.R.C.  1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife. 
B.  The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild quadruped or game bird. 
C.  The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in O.R.C.  1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered all- purpose vehicle sign. 
(d)  (1)  The affirmative defenses authorized in Section 549.02(d)(1) and (2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection (a) that involves a firearm other than a handgun. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a) of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided that the affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by subsection (a) while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic. 
(e)  (1) No person who is charged with a violation of subsection (a) shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(2)  If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b) of this section as it existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (b) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under O.R.C.  2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction. 
If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section as the subsection existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (a) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of subsection (b)(4) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under O.R.C.  2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction. 
(f)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement purpose, or for a purpose defined in O.R.C.  5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender's status as a licensee, a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of O.R.C.  2923.128. A violation of subsection (b)(3) or (4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b)(3) or (4) of this section, a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (b)(3) or (4) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to O.R.C.  2923.128(A)(2). 
(g)  If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this subsection, division (B) of O.R.C.  2923.163 applies. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Motor vehicle, street and highway have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4511.01. 
(2)  A.  Unloaded means: 
1.  With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in subsection (h)(2)B. of this section, that no ammunition is in the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into the firearm in question and one of the following applies: 
a.  There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question. 
b.  Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure. 
2.  For the purposes of subsection (h)(2)A.1.b. of this section, a container that provides complete and separate enclosure includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  A package, box or case with multiple compartments, as long as the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not contain the magazine or speed loader; 
b.  A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the contents. 
3.  For the purposes of subsection (h)(2)A. of this section, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader. 
B.  Unloaded means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan. 
(3)  Commercial motor vehicle has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4506.25(A). 
(4)  Motor carrier enforcement unit means the motor carrier enforcement unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is created by O.R.C.  5503.34. 
(i)  Subsection (h)(2) of this section does not affect the authority of a person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as described in that subsection, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any other provision of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2923. A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter or O.R.C. Ch. 2923. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.16) 
549.05 - FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. 
(a)  No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous ordnance shall negligently fail to take proper precautions: 
(1)  To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person; 
(2)  To insure the safety of persons and property. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to secure dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.19) 
549.06 - UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade knife, gravity knife or similar weapon; 
(2)  When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license or permit showing him to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant to O.R.C.  2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of such record to the sheriff of the county or safety director or police chief of the municipality where the transaction takes place; 
(3)  Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in such person's possession or under his control. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in weapons. Violation of subsections (a)(1) or (2) hereof is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Violation of subsection (a)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.20) 
549.07 - UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM. 
(a)  No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a firearm. 
(b)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a handgun, provided that this subsection does not apply to the purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under 21 years of age if either of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is a law enforcement officer who is properly appointed or employed as a law enforcement officer and has received firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent firearms training. 
(2)  The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of the United States or the Ohio national guard, or was honorably discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States or the Ohio national guard, and the person has received firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of underage purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony of the fourth degree if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.211) 
549.08 - DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS. 
(a)  (1)  Air gun means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by means of releasing pressed air, carbon dioxide or gas. 
(2)  Spring-operated gun means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by means of a spring. 
(3)  Bow and arrow means any device designed to eject a projectile including those devices commonly known as bows and arrows and sling shots. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided for in subsection (c) of this section, no person shall knowingly discharge any firearm, air gun, spring-operated gun, or bow and arrow within the Municipality. This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms within a firing range properly established pursuant to the Powell Zoning Code, law enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law or to any person in the proper exercise of the right of self-defense, or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(c)  An air gun, spring-operated gun or bow and arrow that is a toy weapon may be discharged within the Municipality as long as the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Toy weapon means a non-lethal, replica firearm, air gun, spring-operated gun or bow and arrow device that propels a projectile that is made of plastic, foam, soft rubber, paper, paint, detergent compounds or fabric. 
(2)  A toy weapon may only be fired on private property with the consent of the property owner and the projectile must remain on the property where the toy weapon was fired. 
(d)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 2013-42, 9-3-2013) 
549.09 - THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES. 
(a)  No person shall throw, shoot or propel an arrow, missile, pellet, stone, metal or other similar substance capable of causing physical harm to persons or property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of another, or from any private property into or onto any public place or the property of another. This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges or instruction nor when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
549.10 - POSSESSING REPLICA FIREARM IN SCHOOL. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the object is capable of being fired. 
(2)  The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and indicates that it is a firearm. 
(b)  Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to premises upon which home schooling is conducted. Subsection (a) hereof also does not apply to a school administrator, teacher, or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the direction of a school administrator, teacher, or employee, or any other person who with the express prior approval of a school administrator possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose, including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, reenactment, or other dramatic presentation, or a ROTC activity or another similar use of the object. 
(c)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of O.R.C.  2923.122, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  (1)  In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section and subject to subsection (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school operated by a board of education or for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under O.R.C.  3301.07, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver's license that then is in effect from the range specified in division (A)(4) of O.R.C.  4510.02 and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type during the period of the suspension. 
If the offender is not a resident of this state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in division (A)(4) of O.R.C.  4510.02. 
(2)  If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend one of the types of licenses, permits, or privileges specified in subsection (d)(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction permits specified in that subsection, the court in its discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation, or denial required in that subsection, but the court, in its discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court. 
(e)  As used in this section, "object that is indistinguishable from a firearm" means an object made, constructed, or altered so that, to a reasonable person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a firearm. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.122) 
549.11 - DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF A FIREARM; POSSESSING A DEFACED FIREARM. 
(a)  No person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark or identification on a firearm. 
(2)  Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed, or obliterated. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(2)  Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.201) 
549.12 - SPECIFICATION CONCERNING USE OF FIREARM BY VIOLENT CAREER CRIMINAL TO FACILITATE OFFENSE. 
(a)  The imposition of a mandatory prison term of two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or 11 years upon an offender under O.R.C.  2929.14(K) is precluded unless the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to committing a violent felony offense and unless the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense specifies that the offender is a violent career criminal and had a firearm on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control while committing the presently charged violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the offense. The specification shall be stated at the end of the body of the indictment, count, or information and shall be stated in substantially the following form: 
"SPECIFICATION (or, SPECIFICATION TO THE FIRST COUNT). 
The Grand Jurors (or insert the person's or the prosecuting attorney's name when appropriate) further find and specify that (set forth that the offender is a violent career criminal and did have a firearm on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control while committing the presently charged violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the offense.)" 
(b)  A court may not impose more than one sentence under O.R.C.  2923.132(C) and O.R.C.  2929.14(K) for acts committed as part of the same act or transaction. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Firearm has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2923.11. 
(2)  Violent career criminal and violent felony offense have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2923.132. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2941.1424) 
549.13 - UNLAWFUL USE OF A WEAPON BY A VIOLENT CAREER CRIMINAL. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  A.  Violent career criminal means a person who within the preceding eight years, subject to extension as provided in subsection (a)(1)B. of this section, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violent felony offenses that are separated by intervening sentences and are not so closely related to each other and connected in time and place that they constitute a course of criminal conduct. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection (a)(1)C. of this section, the eight-year period described in subsection (a)(1)A. of this section shall be extended by a period of time equal to any period of time during which the person, within that eight-year period, was confined as a result of having been accused of an offense, having been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense, or having been accused of violating or found to have violated any community control sanction, post-release control sanction, or term or condition of supervised release. 
C.  Subsection (a)(1)B. of this section shall not apply to extend the eight-year period described in subsection (a)(1)A. of this section by any period of time during which a person is confined if the person is acquitted of the charges or the charges are dismissed in final disposition of the case or during which a person is confined as a result of having been accused of violating any sanction, term, or condition described in subsection (a)(1)B. of this section if the person subsequently is not found to have violated that sanction, term, or condition. 
(2)  Violent felony offense means any of the following: 
A.  A violation of O.R.C.  2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2905.01, 2905.02, 2909.02, 2909.23, 2911.01,2911.02, or 2911.11; 
B.  A violation of division (a)(1) or (2) of O.R.C.  2911.12; 
C.  A felony violation of O.R.C.  2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, or 2907.05; 
D.  A felony violation of O.R.C.  2909.24 or a violation of O.R.C.  2919.25 that is a felony of the third degree; 
E.  A felony violation of any existing or former ordinance or law of this state, another state, or the United States that is or was substantially equivalent to any offense listed or described in subsections (a)(2)A. to E. of this section; 
F.  A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any of the offenses listed or described in subsections (a)(2)A. to E. of this section, if the conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is a felony of the first or second degree. 
(3)  Dangerous ordnance and firearm have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  2923.11. 
(4)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2929.01. 
(5)  Post-release control sanction has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2967.01. 
(6)  Supervised release has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  2950.01. 
(b)  No violent career criminal shall knowingly use any firearm or dangerous ordnance. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful use of a weapon by a violent career criminal, a felony of the first degree, and, notwithstanding O.R.C.  2929.14(A)(1), the court shall impose upon the offender a mandatory prison term of two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or 11 years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-52 ,  1, 6 (Exh. A), 10-17-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2923.132) 
549.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 553 - RAILROADS[14] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
Cross reference- Vehicular homicide,  537.02; Criminal mischief,  541.04 
State Law reference- Lighting railroads, O.R.C.  723.33 et seq.; Power to regulate train speed, O.R.C.  723.48 

553.01 - OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY RAILROAD COMPANIES. 
(a)  (1)  No railroad company shall obstruct or permit or cause to be obstructed a public street, road or highway by permitting a railroad car, locomotive or other obstruction to remain upon or across it for longer than five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing along or upon such street, road or highway. 
(2)  At the end of each five minute period of obstruction of a public street, road or highway, each railroad company shall cause such railroad car, locomotive or other obstruction to be removed for sufficient time, not less than three minutes, to allow the passage of persons and vehicles waiting to cross. 
(3)  This section does not apply to obstruction of a public street, road or highway by a continuously moving through train or caused by circumstances wholly beyond the control of the railroad company, but does apply to other obstructions, including without limitation those caused by stopped trains and trains engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations. 
(4)  If a railroad car, locomotive, or other obstruction is obstructing a public street, road, or highway in violation of subsection (a)(1) hereof and the violation occurs in the unincorporated area of one or more counties, or in one or more municipal corporations, the officers and employees of each affected county or municipal corporation may charge the railroad company with only one violation of the law arising from the same facts and circumstances and the same act. 
(5)  Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this subsection (a)(1) hereof, summons shall be issued to the railroad company pursuant to O.R.C.  2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular ticket or freight agent of the company in the county where the offense occurred. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.21) 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "railroad company" includes the officers, employees and agents of such company. 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined $1,000.00. 
553.011 - OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY ABANDONING THE LOCOMOTIVE. 
(a)  No railroad company shall obstruct, or permit or cause to be obstructed, a public street, road, or highway, by permitting any part of a train whose crew has abandoned the locomotive to remain across it for longer than five minutes to the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing along or upon the street, road, or highway, unless the safety of the train crew requires them to abandon the locomotive. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this section, summons shall be issued to the railroad company pursuant to O.R.C.  2935.10(B), which summons shall be served on the regular ticket or freight agent of the company in the county where the offense occurred. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.211) 
(c)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined $5,000.00. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  5589.99) 
553.02 - CLIMBING UPON RAILROAD CARS. 
(a)  No person shall climb, jump, step or stand upon or cling or attach himself to a locomotive, engine or car upon the track of a railroad, unless in compliance with law or by permission under the rules of the corporation managing such railroad. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4999.02) 
553.03 - DUTIES OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEER. 
(a)  No person in charge of a locomotive shall do the following: 
(1)  Fail to bring the locomotive to a full stop at least 200 feet before arriving at a crossing with another track, or proceed through the crossing before signaled to do so or before the way is clear; 
(2)  When approaching a grade crossing, fail to sound the locomotive whistle at frequent intervals, beginning not less than 1,320 feet from such crossing and continuing until the locomotive has passed the crossing. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this misdemeanor causes physical harm to any person, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  4999.04) 
553.04 - RAILROAD VANDALISM. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle is on a railroad track. 
(b)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when it is on a railroad track. 
(c)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle is on a railroad track. 
(d)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of a railroad company. 
(e)  Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of railroad vandalism. Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car or other railroad vehicle. Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of interference with the operation of a train. 
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(f)  Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.10) 
553.05 - GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove or otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign, yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of railroad grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this section causes serious physical harm to property, creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  2909.101) 
553.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification. 
CHAPTER 557 - WEEDS[15] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Notice to cut noxious weeds, O.R.C.  731.51 et seq.; Destruction of weeds, O.R.C.  971.33 et seq.; Noxious weeds, see OAC 901:5-31 

557.01 - CUTTING REQUIRED. 
Duties of owner and occupant; cutting required. 
(a)  Council has determined that in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to provide for the orderly appearance of properties within the Municipality, it is necessary to provide for the cutting and destruction of weeds, grass, and other undesirable vegetation as set forth herein. It is the intention of Council that this chapter be liberally construed to effect the intention as stated above. 
(b)  The record title owner and any occupants shall be the individuals or entities subject to the provisions of this chapter. Neither the owner nor occupant may raise as a defense the obligation of the other to comply with this chapter. 
(c)  No person, whether an owner or occupant having charge or care of land in the Municipality, shall permit: 
(1)  Noxious weeds, including but not limited to (Shatter Cane, Russian Thistle, Johnsongrass, Wild Parsnip, Wild Carrot, Oxeye daisy, Wild Mustard, uncultivated grapevines, Canada Thistle, Poison Hemlock, Cressleaf Groundsel, Musk Thistle, Purple Loosestrife, Mile-A-Minute Weed, burdocks, jimsonweed, ragweed, milkweed, mullein, poison ivy, poison oak), to grow thereon, or fail to destroy and cut such weeds when notified by the Municipal Manager or his designated agent. 
(2)  Growth of grass, herbage of rank growth, or undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines, growing on developed property to reach a height in excess of seven inches, not including ornamental grasses, or fail to cut and destroy such grass, herbage of rank growth, or undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines when notified to do so by the Municipal Manager or his designated agent. 
(3)  Growth on undeveloped properties of grass, herbage of rank growth, or undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines to a height in excess of ten inches or to spread mature seeds thereon, or to fail to cut and destroy such weeds, herbage, vegetation, grasses or vines when notified by the Municipal Manager or his designated agent. 
(4)  The growth of lawn, hedges, bushes, and/or noxious weeds, herbage of rank growth, or undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines such that the same overhang a public or private sidewalk or a driveway or obstruct in any way a doorway. 
(d)  The Municipal Manager or his designated agent shall determine when lots in the Municipality contain noxious weeds as defined in subsection (c)(1) hereof, herbage of rank growth, or other undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines which constitute a nuisance or endanger the public health and safety and shall see that such weeds, herbage, vegetation, grasses or vines are removed or the nuisance abated. 
(Ord. No. 97-50, 10-7-1997) 
557.02 - NOTICE TO CUT. 
(a)  The Municipal Manager or his designated agent shall cause written notice to be served as frequently as said Manager or agent deems appropriate upon the owner and occupant notifying him that noxious weeds, herbage of rank growth or other undesirable vegetation, grasses or vines are growing on such land and that they shall be cut and destroyed within seven days after mailing of such notice and posting such notice at the property and thereafter during the growing season with such frequency to prevent such weeds, herbage, vegetation, grasses or vines from violating the provisions of Chapter 557. Such written notice shall be transmitted by means of ordinary mail to the owner at the tax billing address indicated by the County Auditor and further by posting a notice on the property in question for purposes of notifying the occupant. 
(b)  In those instances where the address of the owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(Ord. No. 97-50, 10-9-1997) 
557.03 - FAILURE TO COMPLY. 
    No owner or occupant having the care of a lot or land, shall fail to comply with the notices provided for in Section 557.02 within seven days of mailing and posting of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 97-50, 10-7-1997) 
557.04 - PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE. 
(a)  If the owner or occupant having the care of the lands mentioned in Section 557.01, fails to comply with the notice provided for in Section 557.02, the City shall cause such noxious weeds and grass to be cut and removed. Such cutting and removal shall be immediately due and payable to the Municipality provided, however, that the administrative fee shall not exceed $500.00. The cost and administrative fee shall be assessed against the lot or land. 
(b)  Notice of such assessment shall be given to the owner of the lot of land charged therewith, and the occupant by mailing such notice to the address utilized by the County Treasurer for tax billing purposes and by posting a Notice of Assessment at the subject premises. All assessments not paid within ten days after such mailing and posting, after approval by the City Manager, shall be certified by the Clerk of Council to the County Auditor to be placed on the tax duplicate and collected as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 5-6-2008) 
557.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
PART SEVEN - BUSINESS REGULATION CODE 
CHAPTER 711 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- False alarms,  509.07 

711.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Alarm system means any combination or assemblage of equipment of any type whatsoever arranged or designed to provide an audible, electronic, or visible signal indicating the occurrence of an unauthorized or illegal entrance or other activity requiring urgent attention and intended or designed to elicit a response from the Police Department excluding such systems which are installed in automobiles. 
    Alarm user means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity in control of or owning any building or structure or any portion thereof which is intended to be protected by an alarm system. 
    False alarm means an alarm system signal or message intended or designed to elicit an urgent response from the Police Department when a situation requiring such a response from the Police Department does not in fact exist but excluding an alarm signal caused by an unusually violent condition of nature and further excluding activities subject to prosecution pursuant to the provisions of Section 509.07. An alarm which has been activated as a result of a repair or test or other activity of the owner or entity in control of the building or structure shall not be considered a false alarm provided notification of the same is transmitted to the Police Department in writing prior to the response of the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.02 - ALARM USER LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  No individual or other entity shall operate or permit on premises under its control the operation of an alarm system unless an alarm system user license has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Each property address or portion thereof served by separate alarm systems must be separately licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.03 - APPLICATION FOR ALARM USER LICENSE. 
(a)  Prior to activation of an alarm system, or within 90 days of the adoption of this chapter for systems already activated, an application for alarm user license shall be made to the Police Department on forms provided by the Police Department. The application shall include as a minimum the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the name, address and telephone number of the property to be serviced by the alarm systems. 
(b)  Each application for alarm user license shall contain as a minimum at least one other name, address, and telephone number of a person to be contacted in case of an emergency where the user is unavailable. In the event the alarm system is designed to be monitored by an alarm monitoring company, the application at a minimum shall contain the company name, address and telephone number and the identity of an individual to contact at such company together with account number and such other information as is necessary to identify the alarm system. 
(c)  It shall be the obligation of each applicant for alarm user license to immediately notify the Police Department of any changed information relative to individuals to contact, address and telephone numbers and any changes in utilization of the alarm system monitoring company. 
(d)  Each application for alarm user licenses shall be accompanied by a one-time fee in the amount of $25.00 payable to the Municipality of Powell. 
(e)  An alarm user may be charged an additional $25.00 fee if the registration was not complete prior to an alarm activation. 
(f)  When the licensee moves locations within the City of Powell, the licensee must notify the Police Department and a new alarm application must be filed. The $25.00 fee will be waived if the notice of change is made within 30 days of the move. 
(g)  Alarm licenses cannot be transferred between property owners. When an existing alarm license is no longer in contract by the licensee, the license is void. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.04 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is reserved for future legislation. 
711.05 - SYSTEM STANDARDS. 
(a)  No alarm user license shall be issued for any alarm system which can be activated by a failure in the electric service from the utility, unless such alarm systems are equipped with a secondary power source which shall provide sufficient electric to operate the system in the event of failure of electric service from the utility. 
(b)  No alarm user license shall be issued for any alarm system which does not have an automatic cut off which discontinues the alarm signal within 15 minutes after activation, whether the alarm system emits an audio signal or other signal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.06 - ALARM VALIDITY DETERMINATIONS. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm system is activated requiring an emergency response from the Police Department, the Police Officer who so responded shall make an initial determination and inspect the area to determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a "false alarm." 
(b)  If the inspecting Police Officer determines the signal to be a false alarm, the Police Officer shall make a report of the false alarm and either leave a copy or mail a copy of the report to the violator. 
(c)  Within 15 days of mailing the notice of false alarm, the alarm user may request an administrative hearing in writing and present evidence and testimony to determine whether the alarm was in fact a false alarm. The request shall be filed with the Chief of Police if such a request is made. 
(d)  The Chief of Police shall determine the appropriateness of the false alarm notice and action to be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.07 - FALSE ALARM PROHIBITED. 
(a)  Each false alarm shall constitute a separate false alarm when Police response is elicited. Any response to a false alarm to the address by an agency other than the Police Department in response to the alarm shall in like manner be considered a false alarm. Any activation of the alarm is presumed to elicit a response from the Police Department. 
(b)  No service fees shall be assessed for the first three false alarms per calendar year for each alarm user or licensee, except for an unregistered system. 
(c)  Each false alarm for a calendar year in excess of three false alarms shall be assessed against the alarm user at the following rate: $25.00 for the fourth, $50.00 for the fifth, $100.00 for the sixth, and $150.00 for the seventh and every occasion thereafter within the year. The licensee shall be notified of such charge by the Chief of Police in writing at the service address. The alarm user licensee shall pay such fee to the City of Powell within 30 days of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.08 - REVOCATION OF ALARM USER LICENSE. 
(a)  An alarm user license may be revoked by the Chief of Police for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  False alarm in excess of eight per calendar year. 
(2)  Failure to remit the service fees outlined above within 30 days of receipt of the invoice. 
(3)  Falsification of any information on an application for alarm user license. 
(4)  Failure to appear at a hearing regarding the possible revocation of alarm user license. 
(5)  Failure to notify the Police Department of any changes in license information. 
(b)  In any proceeding to revoke the alarm license, a hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager with notification to the alarm user licensee at least ten days in advance of the hearing. The holder of alarm user license shall have the right to counsel and the right to present evidence and testimony. Notice of hearing shall be mailed to the address provided in the license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.09 - APPEAL FROM REVOCATION OF ALARM USER LICENSE. 
(a)  An appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police regarding the revocation of alarm user license may be made to the City Manager by executing a Notice of Appeal setting forth the order so appealed from, attaching a copy of the order, and filing the same with the City Manager within ten days of the date notice was transmitted to the alarm user licensee that the license was revoked. 
(b)  In any appeal from revocation of alarm user license to the City Manager, a hearing will be conducted, with notification of the date and time of the appeal hearing at least ten days in advance of such hearing. The holder of the alarm user license having so appealed shall have the right to present evidence, be represented by counsel, and present testimony relative to the appeal. No later than seven days from the date of the hearing on appeal, the City Manager shall issue an order and decision upholding the decision of Chief of Police or reversing the same. The decision of the City Manager shall be final and a copy of the decision shall be transmitted to the licensee by ordinary mail at the address set forth in the license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 3-16-2004) 
711.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever is determined to have failed to obtain an alarm user license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first offense and may be fined not more than $100.00 and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent and may be fined not more than $300.00. 
(b)  Whoever is determined to have operated an alarm system after revocation of alarm user license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and fined not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, 6-16-1992) 
CHAPTER 715 - MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS 
Sections: 

715.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Mobile ice cream vendor means any vehicle from which prepackaged ice cream, popsicles or frozen desserts of any kind are carried, sold, stored, or dispensed for purposes of retail sale, or offered for retail sale, while it is operating within the public rights-of-way within the City. 
    Vendor as used in this chapter shall mean any person who sells or offers for retail sale and immediate delivery prepackaged ice cream, popsicles or frozen desserts of any kind or any person who operates or is otherwise physically within a mobile ice cream vendor vehicle while it is operating within the public rights-of-way within the City. 
    Operate as used in this chapter shall include any person who drives, rides within or is otherwise physically within a mobile ice cream vendor while during any time that it is in the public rights-of-way within the City. 
    Permit as used in this chapter shall mean the permit issued by the Chief of Police of the City for the purposes of operating as a mobile ice cream vendor on public rights-of-way within the City. 
    Application as used in this chapter shall mean the application for permit to operate as a mobile ice cream vendor within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.02 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    Mobile ice cream vendors shall first obtain a permit for such activity from the Chief of Police. Permits must be displayed as set forth in this chapter in order to be effective. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.03 - PERMIT EXPIRATION. 
    Permits shall only be effective for the calendar year that they are issued, and are void for all subsequent calendar years. Vendors who wish to operate as a mobile ice cream vendor must apply for and obtain new permits for each calendar year that they choose to operate as mobile ice cream vendor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.04 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. 
    The Chief of Police is authorized to issue permits to mobile ice cream vendors upon full compliance by the vendors with the requirements of this chapter. The Chief of Police is authorized to deny permits to vendors operating as mobile ice cream vendors if they are not in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Permits shall be issued in duplicate. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.05 - PERMIT FEES. 
    The Chief of Police is authorized to collect the fees for the issuance of permits as determined by Council, pursuant to Ordinance. Said fees shall include the costs in processing and preparing the permit, obtaining criminal background checks of the vendors, and any other costs that the Chief of Police deems to be appropriate. The Chief of Police is authorized to adjust the fees charged for the issuance of permits as he deems to be appropriate. The Chief of Police is authorized to adjust the fees for the replacement of lost or destroyed permits, if he deems such adjustment to be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.06 - DISPLAY OF PERMIT. 
(a)  Every mobile ice cream vendor must display two valid permits on the exterior of the vehicle, in the manner set out in this chapter. 
(b)  One permit shall be displayed on the passenger side of the vehicle for each person operating as mobile ice cream vendor. 
(c)  Permits displayed on the passenger side of the vehicle shall be displayed in a way as to be clearly visible to all customers, potential customers, patrons or other persons who might purchase prepackaged ice cream, popsicles or frozen desserts of any kind. 
(d)  Permits displayed on the passenger side of the vehicle shall be displayed no lower than three feet and no higher than six feet, as measured from the street level. 
(e)  Permits displayed on the passenger side of the vehicle shall be displayed no further than three feet away from the window, opening, enclosure or other location on the vehicle where the vendor generally sells prepackaged ice cream, popsicles or frozen desserts of any kind. 
(f)  One permit shall be displayed on the driver side of the vehicle for each person operating as a mobile ice cream vendor. 
(g)  Permits displayed on the driver side of the vehicle must be displayed on or within three feet of the driver side door or window. 
(h)  Permits displayed on the driver side of the vehicle must be displayed no lower than three feet and no higher than six feet, as measured from street level. 
(i)  It shall be the responsibility of the mobile ice cream vendors to maintain their permits in good condition. Permits may be protected by lamination, plastic or other transparent materials, as long as each portion of the permit is clearly visible and legible to customers, potential customers, patrons or other persons who might purchase prepackaged ice cream, popsicles or frozen desserts of any kind. Permits that are lost, illegible, faded or otherwise in poor condition shall be replaced, at the expense of the vendor. 
(j)  Each vendor who fails to display two permits in good condition as set forth in this chapter shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.07 - CONTENTS AND APPEARANCE OF PERMITS. 
(a)  The background color or shade of permits shall be changed from one calendar year to the next as directed by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  Each permit shall contain a clear color photograph of the vendor. Photographs shall be a minimum of three inches by five inches, or such other dimensions as directed by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Photographs must have been taken within three months of the date of issuance of the permit, and must accurately depict the current appearance of the vendor. If the Chief of Police determines that the photograph does not accurately depict the current appearance of the vendor, or is unclear in any way, the vendor shall be required to submit photographs deemed acceptable by the Chief of Police. If the appearance of the vendor changes significantly during the calendar year in which the permit is issued, the vendor shall be required to obtain a new permit with a photograph deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police. 
(d)  Each permit shall contain the name and address of the vendor. 
(e)  Each permit shall contain the name of the owner of the mobile ice cream vendor, and a working telephone number for the mobile ice cream vendor. 
(f)  Each permit shall contain the following text in bold print of no less than 24 points font and in all capital letters, "ONLY THE PERSON APPEARING IN THIS PHOTOGRAPH IS AUTHORIZED TO OPERATE THIS MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDOR. IF ANYONE ELSE IS OPERATING THIS MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDOR, CALL THE POWELL POLICE IMMEDIATELY AT (614)885-3374." The text and telephone number as set forth in this paragraph may be modified as deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.08 - CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDS OF VENDORS. 
(a)  Each vendor applying for a permit must also provide authorization for a criminal background check, in order to be approved for a permit. Said authorization shall be provided as part of the application for permit, in a form approved by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  Each vendor applying for a permit must list his or her entire criminal background in the application for permit, in a form approved by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  No person shall operate as a mobile ice cream vendor if that person has been convicted of a crime (misdemeanor or felony) within any state within the United States if the crime involved any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense of violence, as defined in O.R.C. Ch. 29, that is a felony. 
(2)  Any offense that resulted in the offender being designated a "sexual predator" under Ohio law. 
(3)  Any offense that resulted in the offender being designated a "sexually oriented offender" during any period wherein said offender is required to register as a "sexually oriented offender" under Ohio law. 
(d)  If a vendor has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in subsection (c) above after such time as a permit has been issued, that vendor shall be required to surrender that permit to the Chief of Police immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.09 - CONTENTS OF APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS. 
    The Chief of Police shall be authorized to create and amend as appropriate the form of application for permits under this chapter. Said form may include such information as the Chief of Police deems appropriate, including but not limited to proof of valid operator's license, criminal background history, driving history, name, address, social security number, date of birth, proof of insurance and proof of compliance with City, State, County or other governmental health codes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.10 - REVOCATION OF PERMITS. 
    The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the permit of a vendor under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  Upon substantiated complaints that the vendor is suffering from a communicable disease or has made himself or herself obnoxious to the public by the use of indecent, profane or insulting language, or the unsanitary condition of his or her person or clothing. 
(b)  Upon violation by the vendor of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  If it is determined that the vendor made a false material statement in his or her application for a permit. 
    No person shall operate as a mobile ice cream vendor during any period in which his or her permit has been revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police. Any permit revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police shall be deemed to be null and void upon revocation or during the period of suspension, and vendors displaying such permits shall be deemed to be operating a mobile ice cream vendor without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.11 - HOURS OF OPERATION IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS. 
    Mobile ice cream vendors may operate within residential areas of the City only during the time period between 9:00 a.m. and one-half hour after sunset, as determined by the National Weather Service. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
715.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person, firm or corporation which violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each and every violation and noncompliance. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2005-37, 8-2-2005) 
CHAPTER 721 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, O.R.C.  715.61 et seq.; Home solicitation sales, O.R.C.  1345.21 et seq.; Charitable solicitations, O.R.C. Ch. 1716 
Cross reference- Trespassing,  541.05 

721.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Canvasser means any person who seeks to disseminate any lawful message by means of traveling from place to place without soliciting funds or donations. 
    Charitable includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, eleemosynary, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, veteran's medical and social research, either actual or purported. 
    Peddler means any person who carries with him or her for the purpose of sale at retail and immediate or future delivery, goods, wares, food or merchandise, or any person who in person as principal or agent canvasses, sells or otherwise obtains orders or commitments for the sale, repair or exchange of goods, wares, food, or merchandise, or services. 
    Religious or religion shall not include the word charitable, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
    Solicitor means any person who obtains or seeks to obtain funds for any cause whatsoever by means of canvassing from place to place 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.02 - REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  Subject to the exceptions in Section 721.03, all persons who systematically go to each residence, or randomly select residences, for the purpose of peddling and soliciting or any other activity, shall first register with and obtain a license from the Police Chief, or his or her designee, prior to proceeding with such activity. 
(b)  Subject to the exceptions in Section 721.03, all persons acting for or hired by another as a peddler or solicitor in the City shall first register with and obtain a license from the Police Chief, or his or her designee, prior to proceeding with such activity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.03 - EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  The registration and license required by Section 721.02, shall not apply to: the local delivery of newspapers and solicitation of subscriptions for the same, to the sale and delivery of products sponsored by the various associations of the public and parochial school systems and solicited by students of the same, to solicitations and deliveries sponsored and sustained by the Community Association of the City, or to the sale of services or products exclusively to commercial or industrial enterprises located within the boundaries of the City. 
(b)  The registration and license required by Section 721.02, shall not apply to those acting as a canvasser, as defined in Section 721.01, in order to disseminate ideas, thoughts, or messages regarding any cause, issue, religion, or political candidate as long as such canvassing does not include the violation of any local, state, or federal law. 
(c)  The license required by Section 721.02, shall not be required of any individual who, without compensation, acts as a peddler or solicitor on behalf of and for any recognized religious or charitable not for profit organization. However, subject to this chapter, no individual shall act as solicitor or peddler on behalf of or for such organization without first having registered with the Police Chief, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.04 - LICENSE APPLICATION AND REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Applications for license for peddlers and solicitors shall be filed with the Police Chief, or his or her designee, on a form to be furnished by the Police Chief or his or her designee, which shall require, at least, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  A physical description of the applicant; 
(3)  The applicant's social security number; 
(4)  The federal identification number of the applicant's entity or organization if the applicant is peddling or soliciting on behalf of an entity or organization; 
(5)  The name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or for whom he is soliciting, if any, and the length of the applicant's service with such employer or person; 
(6)  The nature and character of the goods to be sold or services to be furnished by the applicant; 
(7)  The names of other municipalities in which the applicant has recently conducted peddling or soliciting activities; and 
(8)  Verification that the applicant or his organization/entity has complied with the requirements of O.R.C. Ch. 1716 pertaining to charitable solicitations, if applicable; 
(9)  If the applicant is soliciting on behalf of a recognized religious or charitable not for profit organization, proof of tax exempt status; and 
(10)  Each individual shall furnish a valid government issued identification which includes a photograph of himself or herself. 
(b)  Applications shall be made at least three business days before the license is issued to allow time to complete a background check completed by the Police Chief, or his or her designee. 
(c)  If the Police Chief, or his or her designee, determines after investigation that the information furnished under this section is correct; that the applicant proposes to engage in lawful commercial or professional enterprise and that neither the applicant nor the enterprise upon which the applicant proposes to engage constitutes a clear and present danger to the residents of the City, he shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(d)  The license fee charged by the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall be the fee as identified in the current Fee Schedule of the City of Powell. All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire 12 months after issued. Other licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(e)  No license shall be required for any person who acts as a canvasser if no donations or any other type of contributions are sought by the canvasser. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.05 - REGISTRATION FOR CHARITABLE OR RELIGIOUS PURPOSE. 
(a)  Applications for registration certificates shall be filed with the Police Chief, or his or her designee, on a form to be furnished by the Police Chief, or his or her designee. Each registration shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address, and the telephone number of the person completing the application; 
(2)  The name of an officer or official of the organization; 
(3)  The nature of the charitable or religious purpose to which the contributions, donations or sale proceeds will be applied; 
(4)  Verification that the applicant or his employer has complied with the requirements of O.R.C. Ch. 1716 pertaining to charitable solicitations, if applicable; 
(5)  If the applicant is a recognized religious or charitable not for profit organization, proof of tax exempt status; and 
(6)  Such other information as the Police Chief, or his or her designee, may require. 
(b)  A registration certificate shall be valid for no more than a 12-month period. The registration certificate shall state the expiration date. 
(c)  No fee shall be required for a registration certificate. 
(d)  No registration certificate shall be required for any person who acts as a canvasser on behalf of a religious or charitable organization if no donations or any other type of contributions are sought by the canvasser. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.06 - APPEALS. 
    Any person who has applied for a license or registration certificate in accordance with this chapter and to whom the Police Chief or his or her designee has, after an investigation, denied a license or registration certificate may appeal the decision to the City Manger. Such appeal shall be considered by the City Manager within five days, and the City Manager's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.07 - CARRYING AND EXHIBITING LICENSE OR REGISTRATION; NONTRANSFERABILITY; WRITTEN RECEIPT REQUIRED. 
(a)  The license or registration certificate issued under this chapter shall at all times be conspicuously attached and exhibited on the outer clothing of the peddler or solicitor. 
(b)  License or registration certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter are non-transferable and shall not be used by any person other than the person identified on the license or registration certificate. 
(c)  Upon request, all solicitors or peddlers shall provide a written receipt showing the name of the peddler or solicitor, the amount of the contribution or purchase and the date. Upon request, all persons acting as peddlers or solicitors on behalf of any recognized religious or charitable not for profit organization shall provide a statement attesting to the organization's exempt status under Section 501 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.08 - BUSINESS HOURS RESTRICTED. 
    No person shall peddle, solicit or conduct market research, door to door, at dwelling houses or businesses at random, on sidewalks or streets, at public places, at private meeting places or in any other manner or place in the City between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. or on any Sunday or holiday. Holiday shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 1.14 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.09 - NOTICE PROHIBITING PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS. 
(a)  The owners or occupants of any residence or place of business may evidence a determination to refuse to receive any uninvited peddlers or solicitors by displaying a weatherproof card, decal or sign not less than three inches by four inches in size nor more than one square foot in total surface area upon or near the main entrance door to the residence or place of business, containing the words "No Peddlers or Solicitors Invited" with letters at least one-third inch in height. 
(b)  No person shall go upon any premises and ring the door bell, rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of such residence or place of business for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupants thereof and engage in peddling or solicitations in defiance of a notice displayed pursuant to the section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.10 - FRAUD PROHIBITED; REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation or peddling for any purpose in the City or in any application or report filed under this chapter. 
(b)  No person having entered into an agreement to conduct any peddling or solicitation on behalf of any person or organization shall fail to remit or pay to the party entitled thereto the proceeds of such peddling or solicitation in accordance with the terms of the agreement. 
(c)  The Police Chief, or his or her designee, may revoke at any time any license or registration certificate issued under this chapter for violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.11 - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. 
    If any particular portion of this chapter, is declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration of invalidity shall be limited to that particular portion declared invalid. The declaration of invalidity shall not affect or impair the remainder of this chapter, and to this end, the provisions are severable. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
721.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a second or subsequent violation of this chapter or any substantially similar chapter of these Codified Ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(b)  A violation of Section 721.09, in addition to other penalties provided for in this chapter, is deemed to be a criminal trespass and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 541.05 of these Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, 10-7-2008) 
CHAPTER 731 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Noxious or offensive odors,  521.09 
State Law reference- State regulations, O.R.C. Ch. 1509 

731.01 - DRILLING PROHIBITED. 
    The drilling and operation of gas and/or oil wells is prohibited within the limits of the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 92, 8-11-1964) 
CHAPTER 741 - VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS 
Sections: 

741.01 - FEE. 
(a)  In accordance with the requirements of O.R.C.  1332.32, all video service providers providing video service in the City pursuant to a video service authorization obtained from the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay the VSP Fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenues received from providing video service in the City, which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP Fee shall be paid quarterly, not sooner than 45 days nor later than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(b)  Upon receipt of notice from a video service provider that it will begin providing video service in the City pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, the City Manager is authorized and directed to provide such video service provider with notice of the VSP Fee as determined by this Council in subsection (a) hereof, which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, 4-1-2008) 
CHAPTER 751 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 
Sections: 

751.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Academic medical center has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  4731.297. 
(b)  Marijuana has the same meaning as marihuana as defined in O.R.C.  3719.01. 
(c)  Medical marijuana means marijuana that is cultivated, processed, dispensed, tested, possessed, or used for a medical purpose. 
(d)  State university has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3345.011. 
(Ord. No. 2017-25 ,  1, 6-20-2017) 
751.02 - CULTIVATION, PROCESSING, OR RETAIL DISPENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITED. 
(a)  The cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana within the City of Powell is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  This section does not prohibit research related to marijuana conducted at a state university, academic medical center, or private research and development organization as part of a research protocol approved by an institutional review board or equivalent entity, if otherwise permitted by state law or rule, or local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-25 ,  1, 6-20-2017) 
751.99 - PENALTY 
    Whoever violates Section 751.02(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-25 ,  1, 6-20-2017) 
PART NINE - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE 
TITLE ONE - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS 
CHAPTER 905 - CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF SIDEWALKS, INTEGRAL APPROACHES/APRONS AND RELATED AREAS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The purpose of this chapter is to provide a consistent procedure for the construction, repair and replacement of sidewalks, integral approaches/aprons and to keep such areas in a safe condition for use by the public. 
Cross reference- Duty to keep sidewalks clean and in repair,  521.06 
State Law reference- Construction or repair at owner's expense, O.R.C.  729.01 et seq.; Notice to construct or repair sidewalks, O.R.C.  729.03 et seq. 

905.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Block or blocks. Approximately equally spaced, generally rectangular, blocks as visible on the surface of a sidewalk area, or blocks as visible on the surface of an integral approach/apron area, formed by saw cut joints or tooled joints in the concrete (control/contraction joints) and/or by expansion joints. 
(b)  Handicap access/approach. That portion contiguous to an integral approach/apron or sidewalk designed and constructed pursuant to The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as it now exists or may from time to time hereafter be amended. 
(c)  Integral approach/apron. That portion of a driveway between the street and the public right-of-way or easement dedicated to the public use containing a sidewalk crossing through it. 
(d)  Sidewalk. A hard surface portion of the street system for pedestrian use which lies outside the curb lines (or integral with the curb) or edge of pavement of the roadway. An area abutting a public right-of-way improved, or intended to be improved, as part of an overall pedestrian travel system within the community. 
(e)  Abutting owner. An individual or entity indicated on the most recent tax records of the Delaware County Auditor's office as owners, in whole or in part, whose property frontage confronts, is adjacent to or abuts the sidewalk, integral approach/apron and related areas. The City intends that all owners of a parcel shall be obligated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on a joint and several basis as this chapter affects any parcel. Further, for purposes of this chapter, any one owner of real estate shall be deemed to be the agent of all other owners of that real estate. 
(f)  Affected areas. Those areas requiring sidewalk construction, repair or replacement after inspection including sidewalks and/or integral approach/aprons. 
(g)  Primary inspection area. The inspection area selected for special attention for a given calendar year, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative and subsequently approved by Council Resolution, which contains properties which have frontages confronting, adjacent to or abutting a sidewalk, integral approach/apron and related areas. Such areas are inspected as set forth within Section 905.04(a). 
(h)  Secondary inspection area. The inspection area containing all other properties within the City, in addition to the primary inspection area, which have frontages confronting, adjacent to or abutting a sidewalk, integral approach/apron and related areas. Such areas are inspected as set forth within Section 905.04(b). 
(Ord. No. 2010-60, 12-21-2010) 
905.02 - OBLIGATION OF ABUTTING OWNER. 
    All sidewalks, integral approaches/aprons within the City shall be constructed and maintained in a good state of repair at all times, they must be kept reasonably clean of snow and ice during the winter months and free of obstructions at all times by the abutting owner or owners of the property in accordance with the requirements of the City as set forth herein and as such requirements may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.03 - INSPECTION PROGRAM. 
    The City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative shall conduct periodically, as determined necessary by such appropriate public official, an inspection program designed to require repair and replacement of sidewalk areas and/or integral approach/apron areas within the City for the purpose of maintaining those areas in a good and orderly state of repair so as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The inspection program shall occur annually for each property within the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Specifically, the annual inspection program shall include both the primary inspection area and the secondary inspection area; such inspections being performed as set forth within Sections 905.04(a) and 905.04(b) respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.04 - INSPECTION CRITERIA. 
(a)  Primary Inspection Area Criteria: The inspection criteria to be utilized by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative shall include inspection of any condition deemed by such official to be potentially detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and shall include, at a minimum, the examination of the following which, if such conditions exist, shall necessitate repair or replacement: 
(1)  Any block having a crack or cracks one-fourth inch or more wide. 
(2)  Adjoining blocks or portions thereof whose edges differ vertically by one-half inch or more. 
(3)  Blocks that have holes in them one-fourth inch or more in diameter or are broken such that pieces are missing or loose. 
(4)  Blocks having depressions, reverse cross-slope (sloping away from the street) or below curb grade so as to impound mud or water. 
(5)  Blocks having a cross-slope and/or longitudinal slope that is deemed excessive by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or the designated representative. 
(6)  Blocks that cause an abrupt change in the longitudinal grade of the sidewalk. 
(7)  Blocks that are raveled; i.e. the surface finish has spalled, leaving it rougher with the coarser aggregate exposed. 
(8)  Any material replaced or repaired without prior approval of the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative unless such official determines such repair or replacement to be in satisfactory condition and in accordance with the standards and specifications for such repairs or replacements adopted by the City. 
(9)  The sod area between the sidewalk and the street protrudes above the sidewalk and impounds water or causes it to drain along the sidewalk (where the sidewalk itself is otherwise in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City). In such cases the condition should be corrected by lowering the sod. In cases where the sod area on either side of the sidewalk is below the grade of the sidewalk (where the sidewalk itself is otherwise in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City), a fill should be made and the area either sodded or seeded. 
(10)  Stumps, stones, private signposts or any other unauthorized obstruction in the sidewalk space. 
(11)  Water-stop boxes, gas stop-boxes, etc., that are not to proper grade. 
(12)  The integral approach/apron is required to be repaired or replaced if the repair or replacement of the sidewalk block area crossing through it requires a disturbance to the integral approach/apron. 
(13)  Any horizontal gap (as measured from inside radius to inside radius of tooled joints) between adjoining blocks three-fourths inch or more wide. 
(b)  Secondary Inspection Area Criteria: The inspection criteria to be utilized by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative shall include inspection of such "triggering" condition as set forth within subsection 905.04(b)(1) which, if such condition exists, shall be deemed by such official to be potentially detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and shall necessitate repair or replacement of said condition along with any and all such other condition(s) as may exist as further set forth within subsecton 905.04(a): 
(1)  Adjoining blocks or portions thereof whose edges differ vertically by 2 inches or more. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.05 - PROCEDURE FOR CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT. 
    When the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative finds deficiencies after such inspection, such official shall: 
(a)  Verify the identity of the property owner or owners utilizing the Delaware County Auditor's records. 
(b)  Prepare a notice for each property setting forth the deficiencies discovered upon inspection, and other pertinent information as set forth in subsection (d). 
(c)  Serve the notice of deficiency on each property owner. Service shall be made upon the property owner or owners by ordinary U.S. Mail, postage prepaid. The City shall also post a list of such information in the manner it uses for posting legislation so that it is accessible to the public. The City may additionally post such information at its website. The notice will recite that the City will accomplish the construction, repairs or replacements as part of the City-wide or neighborhood program and assess the cost of such improvements benefiting the abutting property based upon the actual unit costs associated with the various improvements and assess the cost of such improvements against the abutting property based upon its unit costs over five years at the rate the City is charged for financing such improvements plus one percent. 
(d)  Such notice shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The deficiencies discovered as a result of inspection. 
(2)  That a property owner(s) has 45 days from transmittal of the notice to advise the City that the property owner(s) does not consent to the improvements, repair or replacement by the City and that the property owner(s) "opt-out" as otherwise set forth in this chapter. Such lack of consent and "opt-out" must be sent from the property owner(s) to the City in writing at the address stated in the original notice from the City to the property owner(s). The notice from the property owner(s) to the City must be received by the City within 45 days of transmittal of the original notice from the City to the property owner(s). 
(3)  If the property owner(s) fails to advise the City of the property owner's absence of consent, it shall be presumed for all purposes that the property owner(s) has consented. 
(4)  A property owner(s) may "opt-out" in accordance with this chapter. Such "opt-out" shall be accomplished in writing and served upon the City within 45 days of the transmittal of the original notice from the City to the property owner(s). 
(5)  Requirements for permitting and inspection if the property owner(s) intend to opt-out. 
(6)  If trees within the public right-of-way abutting the owner(s)' property are damaged or lost as a result of such construction in furtherance of this chapter, the abutting property owner(s) may apply to the City for priority under any City-sponsored tree replacement program then in effect. Such property owner(s) may make the same application to the City if root damage within the public right-of-way results in the loss of trees on the owner(s) private property. 
(7)  If the property owner(s) chooses to "opt-out," the City-approved methods of sidewalk, integral approach/apron construction, repair or replacement consist of: 
A.  Concrete leveling (also known as pumping or jacking) to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, for repair of adjoining blocks which have edges differing vertically, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Horizontal gap filling for repairing horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks measuring up to, and including, 11/2 inches, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter. The joint sealant shall be polyurethane, self-leveling sealant and the sealant and application method shall be approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. However; this method is not approved for repair of cracks within the area of a block; for such conditions the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. Further, for horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks exceeding 11/2 inches, the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter;. 
C.  Construction or replacement, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. 
D.  Other methods are not acceptable unless otherwise approved in writing, and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. 
(8)  That if the property owner(s) disagrees with the findings by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, that property owner may attend the hearing(s) by City Council on the Resolution of Necessity. At such hearing(s), the property owner has the burden to present sufficient evidence to overcome the presumption that said findings are appropriate, in order for City Council to modify the Resolution of Necessity with regards to the property owner(s)' property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.06 - CONSTRUCTION BY PROPERTY OWNER (OPT OUT). 
    Any property owner who desires to opt-out of the City program and take responsibility for performing the required construction, repairs and replacements shall return to the City, within 45 days of the date of the notice sent by the City, a request by the property owner to "opt-out" of the City program and shall comply with the following requirements and specifications: 
(a)  Notify the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative in writing of the identity of the contractor(s) who will perform the work so the City may register the contractor and examine the contractor(s)' licensing. 
(b)  Identify the proposed method(s) of construction, repair or replacement so the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative may determine appropriateness. The City-approved methods of sidewalk, integral approach/apron construction, repair or replacement consist of: 
(1)  Concrete leveling (also known as pumping or jacking) to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, for repair of adjoining blocks which have edges differing vertically, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Horizontal gap filling for repairing horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks measuring up to, and including, 11/2 inches, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter. The joint sealant shall be polyurethane, self-leveling sealant and the sealant and application method shall be approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. However; this method is not approved for repair of cracks within the area of a block; for such conditions the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. Further, for horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks exceeding 11/2 inches, the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Construction or replacement, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Other methods are not acceptable unless otherwise approved in writing, and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. 
(c)  Acknowledge on the notice to the City that the improvement will be completed within 60 days (from the date the City receives the opt-out notice from the property owner(s)) in a fashion satisfactory to the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative or that the property owner will be subject to a fine at the rate of $50.00 per day until such improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner as determined by such public official, each day being a separate offense, and that the City may, at the City's option, accomplish such construction and place a lien on the landowner's property for the cost of such construction. 
    The City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative may extend, in such public official's sole discretion, the time for performance by the property owner for any reason deemed appropriate by such public official including delays occasioned by natural disaster, weather or other unforeseen circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.07 - CONSENT. 
Every owner of real property in the City of Powell is: 
(a)  Deemed to have consented to the entry upon private property as considered appropriate by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative for any of the purposes set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Deemed to have consented to the grinding, cutting or removing of roots and trees within the public right-of-way abutting the owner(s)' property or the grinding, cutting or removing of roots in the public right-of-way for trees located on the owner(s)' private property if such grinding, cutting or removing of roots occurs in furtherance of this chapter. 
(c)  Any public official is immune from civil or criminal liability for entry upon real property in furtherance of the purposes set forth in this chapter and the City and its agents and employees shall have no liability for the damage or destruction to any trees or tree roots for activity conducted in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.071 - MANDATORY DISCLOSURE. 
    Any property owner who receives the notice set forth in Section 905.05 or who elects to opt-out pursuant to those provisions in Section 905.06 and, who thereafter transfers all or any portion of the title to the property before concluding such repairs and having them accepted by the City is under an affirmative duty to disclose in writing to the transferee of such property of the contents of the notice or the election to opt-out. The failure of the property owner to disclose such information to the transferee shall result in the property owner being liable to the transferee for all costs associated with the repair or improvements to such property required to be completed by the transferee including reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the transferee for the purpose of collecting such sums from the transferor (property owner). Nothing contained within this section shall be construed to alter or diminish the City's rights under Section 905.09(b) to collect all amounts due from the transferee or any subsequent transferee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.08 - RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY. 
(a)  The City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative shall from time to time prepare a list of all properties in need of construction, repair or replacement of sidewalks, integral approaches/aprons. Such list shall be submitted to Council and at a time it deems appropriate, Council may adopt a Resolution of Necessity reciting the necessity to repair or replace or construct those sidewalks, integral approaches/aprons as indicated by the public official. Upon adoption of such Resolution of Necessity: 
(1)  The City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative may proceed to prepare solicitations for bids for completing the public improvements and/or repairs for all properties not opting out of the City program or for any property in which the property owner fails to comply with any of the opt-out procedures set forth herein and, 
(2)  Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary from time to time to accomplish such improvements and defray the costs of such improvements upon such terms as Council deems appropriate and, 
(3)  Council may at its discretion borrow such funds as Council deems appropriate for the cost of such construction, repair and replacement and the defraying of all costs associated therewith. 
(b)  The Resolution of Necessity shall be held no later than 20 days and no less than ten days after the date of mailing of the notice provided in 905.05(d). 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.09 - ASSESSMENT. 
(a)  Upon completion of such construction, repair or replacement, all owners affected thereby shall be notified of a public hearing to determine any mistake of fact regarding allocation of such assessments and: 
(1)  Notice of such public hearing shall be served upon all property owners in accordance by ordinary U.S. Mail, postage prepaid. The City shall also post a list of such information in the manner it uses for posting legislation so that it is accessible to the public. The City may additionally post such information at its website, and, 
(2)  After such public hearing, Council shall determine the unit cost of such construction, repair or replacement associated with the various improvements performed and, 
(3)  Council shall assess the costs, as determined pursuant to item (2) above, of such improvement against each abutting, benefited property based upon the actual unit cost associated with such improvements and, 
(4)  The Clerk shall certify the amount of such assessment, its effective date, and its rate of interest to the County Auditor for addition to the tax duplicate of the properties affected by such assessment. 
(5)  Any persons affected by this section may opt to pay the costs as set out herein within 30 days of the date of said public hearing, instead of having said costs assessed against real property. 
(b)  The obligations hereunder shall run with the land affected by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.10 - SPECIFICATIONS. 
    Concrete sidewalk specifications shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the State of Ohio, Department of Transportation, Construction and Material Specifications (ODTS), Items 608.01, 608.02, 608.03, 608.08 and 608.09, except as follows (all item numbers refer to the ODTS): 
(a)  Concrete shall be Class C, Items 499 and 511, unless otherwise specified or approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(b)  An aggregate base of four inches (thickness) of compacted No. 57 stones (or equivalent approved by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative) shall be placed on top of the prepared subgrade prior to placing concrete for the sidewalk. The subgrade shall be shaped and uniformly compacted to meet the requirements of Item 203 or as ordered by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(c)  The finished surface of the sidewalk shall be float-finished, or broom-finished, perpendicular to the direction of travel path, to obtain a sandy texture-decorative patterns on the finished surface are prohibited (unless otherwise approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative). Do not plaster the concrete. Use a one-fourth-inch radius edging tool to edge all outside edges and joints; 
(d)  Concrete curing shall be in accordance with Item 608.03.E (however water curing is prohibited); 
(e)  Sidewalks shall consist of four inches (thickness) of concrete, except where the sidewalk crosses through driveways, in which case the thickness shall be six inches and such thickness must extend one foot wider than the driveway on each side of the driveway; 
(f)  Transverse control/contraction joints (exclusive of expansion joints) for sidewalks may be sawcut (approximately one-eighth-inch width); however, tooled transverse control/contraction joints (exclusive of expansion joints) shall not exceed one-half-inch width from outside radius to outside radius of tooled joint; 
(g)  The surface of sidewalks shall be divided into blocks by joints (transverse control/contraction or expansion) equally spaced at approximately five-foot intervals, to form rectangular blocks (except within Golf Village, said blocks shall be equally spaced at approximately four-foot intervals to approximate the sidewalk width); 
(h)  Expansion joint material one-half inch thick shall be installed for transverse expansion joints to the full depth and across the full width of the concrete sidewalk at intervals of 30 feet minimum, as well as when the sidewalk thickness changes such as at driveways (see item (c) above), and between the walk and any fixed structures or objects including existing or proposed concrete sidewalks, driveways or driveway aprons. The top of the expansion joint material shall be flush with the finished surface of the sidewalk and shall not protrude above the finished surface of the sidewalk; 
(i)  The transverse slope of the surface of the sidewalk shall be 3/16-inch per foot (i.e., 1.6%) preferred; however, the transverse slope shall not exceed 2.0% (i.e., 1:50). Transverse slopes, in accordance with this specification, shall also apply to sidewalks that cross through driveways. The low side of the sidewalk shall be the side adjacent to the roadway; 
(j)  The longitudinal slope of the surface of the sidewalk shall not exceed 5.0% (i.e., 1:20), exclusive of ramps; 
(k)  Sidewalks shall be five feet in width in residential sections of the City unless otherwise approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative and shall have been previously approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The exception to this specification is for sidewalks located within Golf Village, which sidewalk widths shall be four feet minimum; 
(l)  Appurtenances including, but not necessarily limited to, water and gas valve boxes, manholes, sign posts and utility poles shall be located outside of the sidewalk area unless otherwise approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(m)  Roof/sump drains shall be extended beneath the concrete sidewalk through to the curb, at which point they shall be day lighted by coring of an appropriately sized hole through the curb. Drain pipes shall not encroach vertically within the concrete of the sidewalk; 
(n)  Fills, if required, shall be of clean earth (free of foreign materials), compacted in two-inch lifts; or of a suitable aggregate base, as approved by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, compacted in lifts not exceeding four inches; 
(o)  All public sidewalks shall be contained within the public right-of-way, or within a recorded easement, approved in writing and prior to construction by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such easement shall deed rights to the City for the location of the sidewalk and for the public pedestrian use of the sidewalk; 
(p)  As soon as the concrete is firmly set, the forms shall be removed and finished grade shall be made to the level of the concrete sidewalk edges; 
(q)  Obstructions, such as valuable trees of long standing, may be avoided by aligning the sidewalk around the tree. In such cases, the alignment of the sidewalk shall be approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. In all cases of injury to persons or property caused from any obstruction, the City shall not be liable for damage in any respect; 
(r)  All formwork shall be inspected, and receive written approval by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, prior to placing of concrete; 
(s)  All materials used, and completed work, shall be to the satisfaction of the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and shall be free from defects and deficiencies including, but not limited to, surface defects and deficiencies such as uneven/non-uniform discoloration, marring, blotchiness, spalling, peeling, raveling or loss of any kind of the surface finish or exposure of aggregate beneath the finished surface or premature deterioration of the curing compound; 
(t)  The Contractor, or other party performing the construction, shall be solely responsible for ensuring the sidewalk is compliant with the requirements of The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as it now exists or may from time to time hereafter be amended; 
(u)  The Contractor, or other party performing the construction, shall be solely responsible for positively protecting against the adverse impacts that may be caused by weather conditions of any kind. Further, the method employed for protecting the work shall not adversely affect the work in any way; 
(v)  The Contractor, or other party performing the construction, shall be solely responsible for all work site safety and shall comply with all federal, state and local laws, regulations, findings and orders relating to safety and health conditions on the work site; 
(w)  For repair of existing sidewalk with horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks measuring up to, and including, one and one-half inches, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter, a joint sealer may be used to fill gaps. The joint sealer shall be polyurethane, self-leveling sealant and the sealant and application method shall be approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. However; this method is not approved for repair of cracks within the area of a block; for such conditions the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. Further, for horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks exceeding one and one-half inches, the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. 
Concrete approach/apron specifications shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the State of Ohio, Department of Transportation, Construction and Material Specifications (ODTS), Items 608.01, 608.02, 608.03, 608.08 and 608.09, except as follows (all item numbers refer to the ODTS): 
(a)  Concrete shall be Class C, Items 499 and 511, unless otherwise specified or approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(b)  Excavation and Forms shall be in accordance with Items 608.03.A and 608.03.B respectively. The subgrade shall be shaped and uniformly compacted to meet the requirements of Item 203 or as ordered by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(c)  Concrete Placing and Finishing shall be as follows: 
(1)  An aggregate base of four inches (thickness) of compacted No. 57 stones (or equivalent approved by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative) shall be placed on top of the prepared subgrade prior to placing concrete; 
(2)  Deposit concrete in a single layer, strike it off with a template, and finish the surface by float-finishing, or broom-finishing, perpendicular to the direction of travel path, to obtain a sandy texture - decorative patterns on the finished surface are prohibited (unless otherwise approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative). Do not plaster the concrete. Use a one-fourth-inch radius edging tool to edge all outside edges and joints; 
(3)  Concrete shall be six inches thick; 
(4)  Control/contraction joints (exclusive of expansion joints) may be tooled or sawcut (if sawcut, approximately one-eight-inch width; if tooled, shall not exceed one-half inch width as measured from outside radius to outside radius of tooled joint). Control/contraction joints shall be appropriately located relative to the size (area) of the approach/apron as approved by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(5)  Expansion joint material one-half inch thick shall be installed at expansion joints to the full depth and across the full length of the concrete approach/apron at the back of concrete curb from limit of approach/apron flare to flare and between the sidewalk and approach/apron. The top of the expansion joint material shall be flush with the finished surface and shall not protrude above the finished surface. 
(d)  Concrete curing shall be in accordance with Item 608.03.E (however; water curing is prohibited); 
(e)  The minimum width of the approach/apron shall be ten feet; however, the maximum width of the approach/apron shall not exceed 20 feet. The aforementioned approach/apron width is that width exclusive of the flares. The approach/apron shall be flared on each side at the interface with the curb. The flares shall be two feet, typical; 
(f)  Appurtenances including, but not necessarily limited to, water and gas valve boxes and manholes shall be located outside of the approach/apron area unless otherwise approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative; 
(g)  Fills, if required, shall be of clean earth (free of foreign materials), compacted in two-inch lifts; or of a suitable aggregate base, as approved by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, compacted in lifts not exceeding four inches; 
(h)  As soon as the concrete is firmly set, the forms shall be removed and finished grade shall be made to the level of the concrete edges; 
(i)  All formwork shall be inspected, and receive written approval by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, prior to placing of concrete; 
(j)  All materials used, and completed work, shall be to the satisfaction of the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and shall be free from defects and deficiencies including, but not limited to, surface defects and deficiencies such as uneven/non-uniform discoloration, marring, blotchiness, spalling, peeling, raveling or loss of any kind of the surface finish or exposure of aggregate beneath the finished surface or premature deterioration of the curing compound; 
(k)  The contractor, or other party performing the construction, shall be solely responsible for positively protecting against the adverse impacts that may be caused by weather conditions of any kind. Further, the method employed for protecting the work shall not adversely affect the work in any way; 
(l)  The contractor, or other party performing the construction, shall be solely responsible for all work site safety and shall comply with all federal, state and local laws, regulations, findings and orders relating to safety and health conditions on the work site; 
(m)  For repair of horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks of existing sidewalk and driveway integral approach/aprons measuring up to, and including, one and one-half inches, and said blocks pass all other inspection criteria as set forth in this chapter, a joint sealer may be used to fill gaps. The joint sealer shall be polyurethane, self-leveling sealant and the sealant and application method shall be approved, in writing and prior to construction, by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative. However; this method is not approved for repair of cracks within the area of a block; for such conditions the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. Further, for horizontal gaps between adjoining blocks of existing sidewalk and driveway integral approach/aprons exceeding one and one-half inches, the blocks shall be constructed or replaced, to proper line and grade, as determined by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative, and such work shall be in accordance with specifications as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
905.11 - FAILURE TO COMPLETE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT. 
    Any property owner who opts out of the City program, and who fails to construct, repair, or replace the affected area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall: 
(a)  Be sent a written notice by the City Engineer/Public Service Director or designated representative of the failure to complete construction, repair or replacement. 
(b)  Be advised in the notice by the City that the City shall proceed to accomplish such construction, repair, or replacement on such basis as the City deems appropriate, including proceeding as though the City had received no notice of "opting out." 
(c)  Be advised that a fine may be imposed as the rate of $50.00 per day until such improvements are constructed in such a fashion satisfactory to the City, each day of such violation constituting a separate offense, and that the City may place a lien on the property for nonpayment of construction costs and/or fines. 
(d)  Be sent the notice required by this division in accordance with the provisions and in the manner set forth for Service of Summons in civil proceedings as set forth in the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(e)  Be guilty of a misdemeanor for and fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $300.00 for constructing, repairing or replacing without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 3-17-2009) 
CHAPTER 906 - DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

906.01 - ROUTINE AND REMEDIAL MAINTENANCE. 
(a)  Owners of properties with stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) are responsible for operation and maintenance as specified in Section 906.03. The Public Service Director shall provide for inspection and routine maintenance of facilities that have been accepted for maintenance by the City. City maintenance may include storm water conveyance- related structure cleaning and repair. 
(b)  The Public Service Director, in the Public Service Director's sole discretion, may provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon the severity of storm water problems and potential hazard to the public health and safety, through the abatement procedures described in Section 906.02. For purposes of this chapter, maintenance associated with retention/detention basins including, but not limited to, mowing, rivulet repair, basin bottom fill, seeding, fertilizing and/or algae removal, are not considered "potentially hazardous" to the public nor "severe" storm water problems, and maintenance will not be provided by the City except in case of public emergency as determined by the Public Service Director. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 3-15-2011) 
906.02 - ABATEMENT PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Notice To Correct Improper Drainage. 
(1)  Whenever the City shall find that (i) a tract of land not maintained by the City is inadequately drained, or (ii) there is excessive erosion or sedimentation upon such land, or (iii) there is an obstruction to a culvert or water course upon such land that interferes with water naturally flowing therein, or (iv) that such culvert, storm sewer or watercourse upon such land is of insufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate the flow of water, as required by the City, the City shall notify the owner or person having possession, charge, or management of such land to remove the obstruction, provide adequate drainage, fill or drain such land, enlarge the culverts, drains, or watercourses, mitigate excessive erosion or sedimentation, and/or accomplish any other act determined by the Public Service Director necessary to be necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Such notice shall be served on such persons or entity in the same manner as provided by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure for service of Summons and the Public Service Director may post a notice at the property. The address utilized for any service shall be the property address itself and the tax billing address for such premises as maintained on the records of the Delaware County Auditor. 
(2)  The owner must comply with the City's orders within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days, unless an extension is granted by the Public Service Director for good cause shown. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute an unlawful act. Each additional day thereafter during which the owner fails to carry out the order of the City shall constitute a separate offense. 
A.  In any case where a condition described above exists for more than 30 days after service of notice, the Public Service Directormay issue an order to the property owner(s) stating that they are in violation; that the City may effect the necessary repairs per Section 906.02(b) or that the City may file criminal charges in accordance with Section 501.99, or both. 
B.  In the event an owner fails or refuses to comply with the Public Service Director's directive, the City may provide the performance of the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. 
C.  Each and every owner of real property in the City consents to the entry upon any real property in the City for all reasonable times during normal business hours for the purpose of inspection, repair or maintenance required by this chapter. 
(3)  Failure of the City to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of a permit/zoning change shall not relieve the owner or person having possession, charge, or management of such land from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the City, its officers or agents from being responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance on his property, and compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. 
(5)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent immediate action by the City in emergency situations. In case of an emergency, the City may direct that action be taken immediately to correct the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The City may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. 
(b)  Abatement Costs. 
(1)  If the owner or occupant having the care of the lands mentioned in Section 906.01 fails to comply with the notice provided in for Section 906.02(A), the City shall cause such abatement procedures to be implemented. The cost for such abatement procedures shall be immediately due and payable to the City, provided, however, that an administrative fee shall be charged in the amount of $500.00. The cost of the administrative fee together with the cost of the abatement procedure together with any legal fees incurred by the City shall be assessed against the owner and, if unpaid, against the lot or land together with interest thereon at the then judgment rate in effect in the State of Ohio. 
(2)  Notice of such assessment shall be given to the owner of the lot or land charged therewith and the occupant by mailing such notice to the address utilized by the County Treasurer for billing purposes and by posting a notice of assessment at the subject premises. Service may also be made in any manner provided for service of summons by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. All assessments not paid within ten days after such mailing and posting, after approval by Council, shall be certified by the Clerk of Council to the County Auditor to be placed on the tax duplicate and collected as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-16-2007) 
906.03 - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. 
(a)  Operation and Maintenance Plan. 
(1)  The developer/property owner shall prepare an Operation and Maintenance Plan meeting the minimum requirements of the latest version of the Ohio EPA NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit for redevelopment and new development projects wherein construction activities will result in the disturbance of one or more acres. 
(2)  The Operation and Maintenance Plan shall be submitted by the developer/property owner to City of Powell for review and approval prior to the City issuing the building permit. 
(3)  The Operation and Maintenance Plan must be a stand-alone document containing the following: 
A.  Designate the entity associated with providing the Best Management Practices (BMPs) inspection and maintenance. 
B.  Indicate routine and non-routine maintenance tasks to be undertaken. 
C.  Indicate a schedule for inspection and maintenance tasks. 
D.  Provide proof of any necessary legally binding maintenance easements and agreements that are necessary to properly inspect and maintain the BMP(s). 
E.  Provide a map showing the location of the BMP(s) that are indicated on the City of Powell approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and necessary access and maintenance easements. 
F.  Provide detailed BMP drawings and inspection and maintenance procedures. 
G.  Ensure that the collected pollutants resulting from BMP maintenance activities are disposed of in accordance with local, state and federal guidelines. 
(b)  Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions. A Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions shall be made between the Owner and the City of Powell ensuring that the BMP(s) shall be properly inspected and maintained and shall be included within the Operation and Maintenance Plan. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  Personnel identified within the Operation and Maintenance Plan shall inspect the BMP(s) to ensure proper functionality and determine if maintenance is necessary. 
(2)  At a minimum, inspections are to be conducted on an annual basis, or as specified in the Operation and Maintenance Plan. 
(3)  Written inspection reports summarizing the BMP(s) inspection observations and maintenance requirements are to be submitted to the City of Powell upon request by the City. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All BMPs are to be maintained according to the measures outlined within the Operation and Maintenance Plan. 
(2)  Ensure that the collected pollutants resulting from BMP maintenance activities are disposed of in accordance with local, state and federal guidelines. 
(3)  In addition to any applicable provision of Section 1111.052, the Owner shall make necessary repairs within 14 days of their discovery as identified within the inspection reports or through a request from the City of Powell resulting from City conducted inspections. 
(4)  Maintenance activities performed are to be documented on a written report and submitted to the City of Powell upon request. 
(5)  In addition to any applicable provisions of Sections 906.01, 906.02, and 1111.052, the owner shall grant permission to the City of Powell to enter the property and inspect the BMP(s) whenever the City deems necessary. In an event of any default or failure by the owner in properly maintaining the BMP(s) in accordance with the approved Operation and Maintenance Plan, or, in the event of an emergency as determined by the City of Powell, it is the sole discretion of the City, after providing reasonable notice to the owner, to enter the property and take whatever steps necessary to correct deficiencies and to charge the cost of such repairs to the owner. Nothing herein shall obligate the City to maintain the BMP(s). 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 3-15-2011) 
906.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Any person or entity having been determined to violate this chapter or who enters a plea to a violation thereof shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor in accordance with the provisions of Section 501.99. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The imposition of any fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter shall not preclude the Law Director from instituting any appropriate legal proceeding in a Court of proper jurisdiction to correct or abate a violation, require compliance with this chapter or other applicable chapters, ordinances, regulations or rules of the City or State of Ohio as determined to be appropriate by such Law Director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-16-2007) 
CHAPTER 909 - STREETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Municipal Subdivision Regulations. 
State Law reference- Assessments, O.R.C.  701.05, Ch. 727; Power to establish and care for streets, O.R.C.  715.19, 717.01, 723.01; Openings by the Municipality, O.R.C.  723.02; Dedication and acceptance, O.R.C.  723.03; Surface treatment, O.R.C.  723.23, 723.31; Excavation liability, O.R.C.  723.49 et seq.; Changing established grade, O.R.C.  727.07 

TITLE THREE - Utilities 
CHAPTER 921 - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The Municipality has no Municipal water system. Currently Del-Co. Water Co., provides water for the Municipality. 
State Law reference- Power to provide and regulate water systems, O.R.C.  715.08, 717.01, 743.01; Water pollution, O.R.C.  715.08, 743.25; Fluoridation, O.R.C.  6111.13; Backflow, OAC 4101:2-51-38 

TITLE FIVE - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES 
CHAPTER 951 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicle loads dropping, sifting or leaking,  339.08 
State Law reference- Collection and disposal of garbage, O.R.C.  715.43, 717.01; Disposal and transportation upon public ways, O.R.C.  3767.20 et seq. 

951.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Garbage means all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body waste, including vegetable and animal offal, and excluding recognizable industrial byproducts. 
    Refuse includes nonputrescible, nonliquid wastes such as ashes, wastepaper, tin cans, glass, wood and wood boxes, trees or shrubs or parts thereof including building materials such as wood, drywood, plaster and shingles. 
    Residence means separate living quarters in the Municipality utilized as residential dwellings. 
    Subscriber means any individual or entity maintaining separate living quarters in the Municipality including owners, tenants and occupants of residential dwellings within the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
951.02 - COLLECTION MANDATORY. 
    All individuals and entities including owners, tenants and occupants of residences shall be subscribers to the Municipal garbage and refuse collection service under the control of the Director of Public Service and shall have their garbage and refuse ready for collection no later than 7:00 a.m., on the date noted by the Director of Public Service for collection of garbage and refuse. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
951.03 - COLLECTION AUTHORIZED. 
    No firm or corporation other than the Director of Public Service or his authorized agent who holds a lawful contract with this Municipality shall collect, remove or transport garbage or refuse from single family residences within the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
951.04 - ACCUMULATIONS. 
    No individual or entity including an owner, tenant or occupant of any residence shall allow garbage or refuse to accumulate in or on his residence for a period in excess of seven days. Fermenting, odiferous garbage and refuse in containers uncollected or dumped in the open shall be deemed a nuisance and the person responsible therefore shall be liable to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
951.05 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Director of Public Service shall provide for the collection of garbage and refuse from residences within the Municipality on at least a weekly basis. The Director of Public Service is authorized and directed to make such rules and regulations relative to the collection, disposal and handling of garbage and refuse as may be necessary to fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
951.06 - DUTY TO PROVIDE CONTAINERS. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every individual or entity occupying a residence including owners, tenants, and occupants to provide at all times suitable containers for the accumulation of garbage or refuse. All containers shall be consistent with the rules and regulations provided by the City's contracted waste hauler. All containers with refuse for collection shall be placed at the location and on the date designated by the City's contracted waste hauler. 
(b)  All garbage and refuse containers shall not be placed outside the front of the residential and commercial property for pick up more than 24 hours before scheduled pick up of such refuse. All garbage and refuse containers shall be removed to behind the building line of residential and commercial property within 24 hours of pick-up. 
(c)  All brush, appliances, furniture and other large items which cannot be placed in a container will be located next to the containers for purposes of collection. All brush must be cut to four foot lengths and bundled in bundles not to exceed one foot in diameter. Each such bundle must weigh less than 80 pounds. Brush shall be considered to be branches less than two inches in diameter. Carpet and carpet padding shall be cut in four foot lengths and bundled in bundles less than 80 pounds. Each item of appliance and furniture to be collected shall weigh less than 350 pounds and shall be no larger than 54 cubic feet in size. Tires, car parts, batteries, motor oil, hazard and toxic wastes shall not be collected and any other item as determined by the City's contracted waste hauler. 
(d)  No individual or entity including any owner, tenant or occupant of a residential structure shall permit any other individual, organization or entity to place garbage or refuse at his residence for purposes of collection. 
(e)  No person, firm, or organization shall, without first obtaining the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises, scavenge, scatter, remove, or take any refuse, garbage, trash, recyclable material, or other item that has been placed at the curb of the premises for collection. This provision shall not apply to any authorized employee or agent of the City or private firm(s) or contractor(s) authorized by the municipality to remove and dispose of such refuse, garbage, trash, or recyclable material. 
(f)  Prosecution of Violation. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with a provision of this Section shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state and local laws. Each day a violation continues after written notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Violations shall be classified as minor misdemeanors for the first offense and shall be classified as a fourth degree misdemeanor for every subsequent offense. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined as set forth in Section 501.99. 
(Ord. No. 2012-16, 7-17-2012) 
951.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates Section 951.02 or Section 951.04 or pleas to a violation of Section 951.02 or Section 951.04, or who is convicted of a violation of Section 951.02 or Section 951.04 shall be fined not more than $50.00. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  If a firm violates Section 951.03 or enters a plea to a violation thereof, or who is found to be guilty of a violation thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and imprisoned for not more than six months and fined not more than $1,000. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, 3-20-1990) 
CHAPTER 953 - CABLE SERVICE AND COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE 
Sections: 

953.01 - TITLE. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Cable Service and Competitive Video Service Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  Affiliate means any person that directly or indirectly owns or controls the provider, any person that a provider directly or indirectly owns or controls, or any person under common ownership or control with a provider. 
(b)  Cable operator means any person or group of persons who has executed a Franchise Agreement and (1) who provides Cable Service over a Cable System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System, or (2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System. 
(c)  Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 
A.  Video programming, or 
B.  Other programming service, and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
(d)  Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of 42 U.S.C.  541 (c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with 42 U.S.C.  573; 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system, or 
(6)  The facilities of a Competitive Video Service Provider under Chapter 191. 
(e)  City means the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(f)  Competitive video service means video program provided by a Competitive Video Service Provider and provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights of way without regard to delivering technology, including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.  332(d). 
(g)  Competitive video service agreement means the agreement executed by the City and a Competitive Video Service Provider pursuant to Chapter 953 of the Powell Codified Ordinances. 
(h)  Competitive video service provider means an entity providing video services that has not executed a Franchise Agreement with the City as of the effective date of this ordinance and is not a Cable Operator, or an affiliate, successor, or assignee of such Cable Operator. 
(i)  Council means the elected City Council for the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(j)  Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to section 47 USC  546), issued by the Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a Cable System by a Cable Operator in the City of Powell. 
(k)  Franchise agreement means the agreement executed by the Franchising Authority and a Cable Operator pursuant to this chapter. 
(l)  Franchising authority means the City of Powell, Ohio. 
(m)  Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions (services or goods) received by the provider from the provision of service within the franchise area. 
(1)  Subject to subsection (m)(2) hereof, the term "gross revenues" shall include the following: 
A.  All charges and fees paid by subscribers for the provision of service, including fees attributable to service when sold individually or as part of a package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with services other than the service; and 
B.  All revenue derived from the provider's service pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising attributable to the local service area. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, the term "gross revenues" shall not include the following: 
A.  Any revenue not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt net of any recoveries of bad debt; 
B.  Refunds, rebates, credits or discounts to subscribers or a municipality to the extent not already offset by subparagraph (2)I. hereof and to the extend such refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to the service; 
C.  Subject to subparagraph (2)D. hereof, any revenues received by the provider or its affiliates from the provision of services or capabilities other than the service, including telecommunications services, information services, and services, capabilities, and applications that may be sold as part of a package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with the service; 
D.  Any revenues received by the provider or its affiliates for the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing; 
E.  Any requirements or charges for managing the public rights-of-way with respect to a Franchise or Competitive Video Agreement under this section, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; 
F.  Any amounts attributable to the provision of service to customers at no charge, including the provision or such service to the public institutions without charge; 
G.  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability imposed on the customer or the transaction by a federal, state, or local government or any other governmental entity, collected by the provider, and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes and utility user taxes; 
H.  Any forgone revenue from the provision of service at no charge to any person, except that any forgone revenue exchanged for trades, barters, services, or other items of value shall be included in gross revenue; 
I.  Sales of capital assets or surplus equipment; 
J.  Reimbursement by programmers of marketing costs actually incurred by the provider operator for the introduction of new programming; and 
K.  The sale of services for resale to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service and pay a provider fee with respect hereto. 
(n)  Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
(o)  Provider means either a Cable Operator or a Competitive Video Service Provider. 
(p)  Service means either a Cable Service or Competitive Video Service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.03 - GRANT OF AUTHORITY. 
(a)  In accordance with this chapter and upon executing a Franchise Agreement, a Cable Operator is authorized to occupy or use the public right-of-ways within the geographical boundaries of the City to construct, operate, maintain, repair, and upgrade existing facilities and install new facilities for the purpose of providing Cable Service for the citizens of the City. The Cable Operator may enter private property only as permitted by the owner of such private property for the purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, and upgrading facilities. 
(b)  In accordance with this chapter and upon executing a Competitive Video Service Agreement, a Competitive Video Service Provider is authorized to occupy or use the public right of ways within the geographical boundaries of the City to construct, operate, maintain, repair, and upgrade existing facilities and install new facilities for the purpose of providing Competitive Video Service within the geographical boundaries of the City. Additionally, the Competitive Video Service Provider may enter private property only as permitted by the owner of such private property for the purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, and upgrading facilities. 
(c)  A provider must comply with state, federal and local law, if applicable, and agree in its respective Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.04 - LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. 
    Any incumbent Cable Operator providing Cable Service in the City on the effective date of this Ordinance may immediately opt out of its existing Franchise Agreement with the City and enter into a Franchise Agreement under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.05 - FEES FOR OPERATION OF CABLE SERVICE AND COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE. 
(a)  As compensation for rights granted under this chapter, Cable Operators shall pay to the City a franchise fee of five percent of the Cable Operator's Gross Revenues. 
(b)  As compensation for rights granted under this chapter, Competitive Video Service Providers shall pay to the City a fee of five percent of the Competitive Video Service Provider's Gross Revenues. 
(c)  Consistent with O.R.C.  4939.05(B)(4), any fees paid by a Cable Operator or Competitive Video Service Provider under this chapter will be credited, offset, or deducted from any public way fee assessed in Chapters 905 and 909 of the City of Powell Codified Ordinances. 
(d)  The City shall have the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable in satisfaction of the fees set forth in this section. Any additional amount due the City as a result of the audit shall be paid by provider within 30 days after the provider receives a written notice from the City. The notice which the City sends to provider shall include a copy of the audit report. Provider shall pay the cost of the audit if the City determines that the annual payment to the City for the preceding year is thereby increased by more than five percent. 
(e)  In the event that payment of any fee set forth in this section, which has been recomputed pursuant to subsection (d) above is not made on or before the expiration of 30 days following written notice by the City, Provider shall be charged and shall pay, in addition to the amount due, interest on the amount due equal to the prevailing prime rate plus 200 basis points of interest compounded daily from the due date for payment of the recomputed amount. The prevailing prime rate shall be the prime rate of Huntington Bank in Columbus, Ohio. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.06 - RIGHT-OF-WAY PROVISIONS. 
    Cable Operators operating Cable Systems and Competitive Video Service Providers providing Competitive Video Service in the City shall abide by all right-of-way provisions as set forth in this chapter and in Chapters 905 and 909. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.07 - PERMITS TO OPERATE SYSTEMS IN THE CITY. 
(a)  No person shall offer to subscribers a Cable Service or Competitive Video Service within the City except pursuant to this chapter. A Cable Operator, however, not electing under Section 953.04 to enter into a Franchise Agreement under this chapter may continue to provide Cable Service under its existing agreement. 
(b)  All Franchise Agreements and Competitive Video Service Agreements granted by ordinance pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. Council reserves the right to issue as many permits as it deems advisable in the public interest. 
(c)  The Franchise Agreements or Competitive Video Service Agreements shall take effect and will be in force from and after the earliest period allowed by law, and upon the filing by the provider with the City Administrator of its acceptance, in writing, of each and all of the terms and provisions of the Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement; provided, however, if the provider shall fail to file such written acceptance within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance by Council, then the ordinance granting the Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Agreement shall be null and void. 
(d)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or in conflict with rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, then such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this chapter, and such holding shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(e)  Any Franchise Agreements or Competitive Video Service Agreements executed pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, after a full due process hearing, by a simple majority vote of Council upon the recommendation of the City Administrator, for violation of material provisions of this chapter, after giving the provider 90 days notice in writing of intention to revoke such permit, unless such violation is corrected during the period of notice, or unless the provider has made a reasonable attempt to correct the violation during that time. 
(f)  The term of each Franchise Agreement and Competitive Video Service Agreement shall be determined by Council, the effective date to be pursuant to subsection (c) above. 
(g)  All renewals shall be in accordance with federal law, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.08 - SERVICE RATES TO SUBSCRIBERS. 
(a)  Providers may set their own service rates and conditions of service. 
(b)  An up-to-date copy of all the provider's rates, rules, regulations and policies having to do with subscriber service must be made available to customer, or on the provider's web site, and provided to the City Administrator upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.09 - SCOPE. 
(a)  This is an enabling ordinance authorizing the use of the City's right-of-way for the provision of Cable Service and Competitive Video Service in the City, but it does not take the place of any license or permit that may be additionally required by law of the provider, either currently or at some later date. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the provider to obtain any and all such licenses or permits necessary to the operation and conduct of its business activities. 
(c)  Failure of the provider to obtain and conform to the material provisions of any and all such franchises, licenses, or permits, and to make prescribed payments if required as a condition of their issuance, shall be considered a violation of this chapter, and subject the provider to the penalties set forth in Section 953.10. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.10 - PENALTY. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 953.07(e), having to do with revocation of permits, whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; any such violation shall constitute a separate offense of each successive day continued. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.11 - PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY BENEFITS. 
(a)  A provider shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow the provision of a comparable number of public, educational, and governmental (PEG) channels or hours of programming, at the City's discretion, that have been activated and provided as of the effective date of this chapter, provided such programming is submitted in a manner and form that is capable of being accepted and transmitted by the provider and compatible with the provider's technology. 
(b)  Any programming made available under this section shall be solely for noncommercial governmental and educational purposes and the content shall be the sole responsibility of the City. 
(c)  Providers shall cooperate with the City to develop an appropriate notification over the Cable Service or Competitive Video Service in the event of a public safety emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.12 - SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS. 
(a)  Providers offering service in the City collectively must offer one free installation and free monthly basic service to one outlet at each public and parochial school, City government building, fire station, police station, and library building that is passed by providers' systems. Each such provider shall have the responsibility to offer a free installation and free monthly basic service to a share of such schools, governmental, or library buildings. Each such provider's share shall be proportionate to the total number of such providers, unless other negotiated compensation has been provided to the City. 
(b)  Such providers shall meet as necessary and determine who will provide service to which school or public building under subsection (a) hereof. If providers are unable to reach agreement as to who will provide free service to which school, governmental, or library building, the City Manager will confer with the providers and determine the assignments in a reasonable manner. This obligation will apply to a new provider of service once that provider's service is available on the section of its system that passes the school or public building assigned to that provider. Until such time, the incumbent provider of service to that location will provide service to such school or public building. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.13 - INDEMNIFICATION. 
(a)  The provider shall indemnify and save harmless the City and all contractors, officers, employees and representatives thereof from all claims, demands, causes of action, copyright action, liability, judgments, costs and expenses or losses for injury or death to persons or damage to property owned by, and Worker's Compensation claims against any parties indemnified herein, arising out of, caused by, or as a result of the provider's construction, lines, cable, erection, maintenance, use or presence of, or removal of any poles, wires, conduit, appurtenances thereto, or equipment or attachments thereto. The provider, however, shall not indemnify: 
(1)  The City for any liabilities, damages, cost and expense resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the City, its officers, employees and agents; or 
(2)  Third parties for any activity or function conducted in connection with any access channel or any emergency messages under Section 953.11(c). 
(b)  The provider must either be self insured, and attach a copy of its certificate of self insurance as an exhibit to its Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement, or carry a good and sufficient public liability and property damage insurance to fulfill the terms of subsection (a) hereof, which insurance shall be in the amounts of not less than $500,000.00 for property damage in any one accident, nor less than $1,000,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year; and not less than $500,000.00 bodily injury or death of any one person, with a minimum of $1,000,000.00 as to any one accident. Such policy shall be subject to the approval of the Law Director as to its form and extent of coverage, as distinguished from dollar amount of coverage. Such policy shall specifically insure against claims arising as the result of underground evacuation. 
(c)  The policy shall provide by endorsement that it may only be cancelled or amended by the insurance company after 30 days notice, in writing to the Law Director. 
(d)  The policy, or policies, must be in force before the provider commences any construction or installations. 
(e)  Either the original policy, or policies, or certificates of insurance must be on file with the City Administrator. 
(f)  The policy shall provide that the naming of the City as an additional insured shall not exempt the insurer from liability to the City for damage to property owned by it or in which it has an interest. 
(g)  Upon termination or revocation or its permit or upon cessation of operations by the provider, the provider is under obligation to remove all of its equipment and installations over City streets, at the request of the City Administrator; over private property at the request of the property owner; and from the homes or business establishments of subscribers at their request. Upon termination or revocation, the provider shall be permitted to abandon in place underground portions of the Cable System or wireline facilities. 
(h)  The provider shall post bond of $100,000.00 guaranteeing the removal of all his equipment and installations, if his operation ceases, whatever the cause or reason, if requested to do so by Council. 
Such bonding as called for in this subsection (h), shall be subject to these requirements: 
(1)  Such bond shall be executed by the provider and one or more sureties reasonably approved by the Law Director. 
(2)  Either the bond, or bonds, or certified copies must be on file with the City Administrator. 
The bond, or bonds, must provide by endorsement that it cannot be cancelled or amended by the bonding company prior to ten days notice to the City Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
953.14 - ASSIGNMENT. 
    Provider may not assign or transfer its Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement or any interest therein, without the prior consent of City, which consent shall not be unreasonable withheld; except that the provider may assign or transfer its agreement or any interest therein to its affiliate upon written notice and without prior consent of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2006-60, 10-17-2006) 
CHAPTER 955 - PARKS[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Playgrounds, O.R.C.  755.12 et seq.; Power to regulate vehicle speed, O.R.C.  4511.07(E) 

955.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Park means any land or water area owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Municipality of Powell, Ohio, for recreational open space or similar and related purposes. 
    Director means the Parks, Recreation and Public Service Director. 
    Manager means the City Manager. 
    Officer means a Police Division Officer, the Parks and Recreation Director or any agent or employee of either. 
    Person means any individual, company, partnership, corporation or association or any combination of individuals, or any employee, agent or officer thereof. 
    Park waters means any lake, pond, reservoir, stream, pool, channel, lagoon, or other body of water, or any part thereof, whether natural or artificial, located in or adjoining a park. 
    Fish or fishing means taking or attempting to take fish by any method, and all other acts such as placing, setting, drawing or using any device commonly used to fish whether resulting in such taking or not. 
    Animal or animals means and includes, but is not limited to, quadrupeds, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, crustaceans, mollusks and insects. 
    Vehicle means every conveyance with wheels, treads, or other means of locomotion. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power. 
    Hours of operation shall be from dawn to dusk daily. 
    All persons entering a park shall adhere to any additional posted rules and regulations not set forth in these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.02 - REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND NATURAL FEATURES. 
(a)  No person in a park shall remove any property, natural feature or part thereof included, but not limited to, any building, equipment, sign, rock, stone, mineral formation, earth, wood, tree, shrub, flower, plant, nut or other seed from a park without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  No person in a park shall injure, destroy, break, cut, chop, write upon, mutilate, set fire to, deface, dig, paint or damage in any manner any property, natural feature or part thereof, including but not limited to, any building, equipment, sign, rock, stone, mineral formation, earth, wood, tree, shrub, flower or plant. 
(c)  No person in a park shall impound or cause to be impounded any park water or in any other way alter or affect the natural flow of such waters without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.03 - DEPOSIT OF MATERIAL. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, discard, dump or leave behind any material of any kind in a park without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee except materials arising from the normal use and enjoyment of a park and then only in receptacles which may have been provided for this purpose. 
(b)  Adjacent to a park, no person shall deposit, discard, dump or leave behind any noxious or waste material included, but not limited to, paper, garbage, ashes or refuse which may blow, wash or be otherwise transported into a park. 
(c)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall place or permit to be placed in any park waters any noxious or deleterious substance, either solid or liquid which may render such waters harmful or inimical to the public health or to animal and plant life. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.04 - PROTECTION OF ANIMALS; HUNTING AND FISHING. 
(a)  No person in a park shall hunt, capture, take, trap or in any other way abuse, molest, injure, pursue or destroy any animal without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee other than by fishing. 
(b)  No person in a park shall move, injure or destroy any bird nest or egg or any animal habitation. 
(c)  No person in a park shall fish in park waters in violation of any sign or signs prohibiting fishing or a manner thereof. 
(d)  Law enforcement officers of proper jurisdiction shall be exempted as required for the humane destruction of injured animals or other reason associated with preservation of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.05 - ANIMAL CONTROL. 
(a)  No person shall bring into, have or keep in a park any dog, cat or other animal unless such animal is kept in a vehicle, suitably caged, or restrained by a leash, in such a manner as to be under the person's control at all times, except where permission has been obtained in advance in writing from the City Manager or his/her designee or in areas designated by signage. 
(b)  No person being the owner or having charge of any animal on any public or private property other than the property of the owner or person having charge of such animal, shall fail to have in his/her possession a wood, plastic, or metal device or other container for the purpose of picking up and properly disposing of any fecal matter left by her/his animal. Failure of any such person to have in his/her possession such suitable device or container is prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(c)  No person in a park shall ride or have under his control a horse except in areas designated for such purpose. 
(d)  No person in a park shall ride a horse, where such is permitted, in such a manner as to endanger the rider, the horse or any other person or any property. 
(e)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall abandon any animal. 
(f)  No person shall herd, graze, drive or permit any animal to run at large in a park, except in area designated for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.06 - AEROSOL PAINT CANS AND OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. 
    No person in a park except an officer or the City Manager or his/her designee shall carry on or about his or her person any hazardous materials including a container capable of propelling paint or other hazardous material by means of a gaseous or liquid charge without having first obtained written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. Personal protection devices such as mace, pepper spray etc., may be excluded from this provision provided they are used only in the appropriate situation for their intended purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.07 - PERSONAL CONDUCT. 
(a)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall conduct herself/himself by work or by act, in a riotous, disorderly, boisterous or other manner so as to disturb the peace and good order in a park. 
(b)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall operate or play a radio, television set, musical instrument, amplifying of sound equipment, or operation of a radio-controlled device so as to disturb the peace and good order in a park. 
(c)  No person in a park shall solicit or procure participants for, engage in, or promote any game which is played for money or other thing of value, except where permission has been obtained in advance in writing from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(d)  No person in or adjacent to a park shall use insulting, abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language or other similar harassing behavior. 
(e)  No person in a park shall loiter in the vicinity of a toilet and no person over the age of six shall enter the toilet facilities provided for the exclusive use of the opposite sex. 
(f)  No person in a park shall willfully resist, obstruct or abuse an officer while such officer is engaged in the execution of her/his office. 
(g)  No person or groups of persons shall assemble in or adjacent to a park for any unlawful purpose or in riotous assemblage or with intent to annoy, harass, or inflict property damage or bodily injury upon another person or persons or inflict damage to a park. 
(h)  No person or groups of persons shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in a park except where permission has been obtained in advance in writing from City Council and the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.08 - FIRES. 
(a)  No person in a park shall start or maintain a fire except in a place or at a site designated for this purpose. 
(b)  No person in a park shall build a fire at a time or period when the City Manager or his/her designee or local fire official has prohibited the building of fires. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.09 - CAMPING. 
    No person in a park shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging or sleeping place within a park without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.10 - SWIMMING, WADING, BOATING, AND ICE SKATING. 
    No person in a park shall engage in the activities of swimming, wading, boating and ice skating in areas or at times which have not been set aside for these purposes by appropriate signage. Occupied motorized or manual boating is not permitted at any time or location. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.11 - FIREARMS AND WEAPONS. 
(a)  No person, other than law enforcement officers, shall carry a firearm of any description, air or gas gun, paint ball gun or other missile throwing device within a park, or discharge any firearms or air or gas guns into or over a park, or bring into a park any pistol, switchblade or hunting knife, dagger, metal knuckles, slingshots, or other weapon or firearms. Additionally no person shall carry or bring into a park any laser light pointing mechanism without first obtaining permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  Firearms, bows and arrows, knives, air or gas guns, missiles, slingshots or other missile-throwing devices or any snares or traps in a park may be confiscated by officers or the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(c)  The use of bow and arrows, crossbows and balloon and rocket launchers are prohibited unless under written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(d)  Fireworks for public display may only be approved by the City Manager, the Police Chief and Fire Chief. Personal use/display of fireworks is prohibited in Powell. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.12 - COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES. 
(a)  No person in a park shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege, or service without having first obtained written permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  No person in a park shall beg, peddle or solicit for money, a privilege or a service. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.13 - ERECTING AND ATTACHING SIGNS. 
    No person in a park shall erect a sign or attach a sign to property owned or controlled by the Municipality, nor shall any person display any placard, notice, advertisement, circular, banner, or statement of any other kind of sign other than a permanent sign on a vehicle without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.14 - HOURS OF USE. 
    No person shall enter or remain in a park after the hours of a legally permitted activity, those hours in Powell, Ohio being from dawn to dusk, without a permit from the City Manger or his/her designee. After-hours use of bike paths fully or partially contained within a park is permitted where those persons are making progression through the park by continuous movement along the paths. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.15 - UNAUTHORIZED STRUCTURES. 
    No person in a park shall construct, erect, or in any other way building any structure without a permit from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.16 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC. 
(a)  No person in a park shall operate any motor vehicle in or on any portion of a park not designated as a park drive nor shall any person park any motor vehicle in or on any other portion of a park not designated as a parking area. 
(b)  No person in a park shall operate a snowmobile or an unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind except in designated areas. 
(c)  No person in a park shall operate a vehicle in such a manner as to endanger the operator or any other person or any property. 
(d)  No person in a park shall drive around, cause to be moved or damage any barricades or barrier so placed temporarily or permanently close a road to traffic. 
(e)  No person in a park shall operate a vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit. 
(f)  No person shall leave a vehicle in a park during the hours when a park is closed. 
(g)  Vehicles in parks in violation of this chapter shall be removed or cause to be removed by officers to a location, in or outside of a park, where the same may be kept until the owners or their authorized representatives obtain an order from the City Manager or his/her designee releasing such vehicles to the owners thereof or their authorized representatives. The Municipality shall not be responsible for any fee, charge or damage arising from such impoundment. 
(h)  No person in a park shall accelerate a motor vehicle causing the rubber tires to mark or deface park roadway surfaces. 
(i)  No person shall clean, wash or repair any automobile or other vehicle in or upon a park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.17 - RESERVATION OF MULTI-PURPOSE FIELDS, AND PARK ENTITIES. 
(a)  Multi-purpose fields may be reserved for use by residents of the Municipality of Powell, Ohio and that resident must be present at the site during the time reserved. The person reserving the field must be a Powell, Ohio resident, however all users need not be. 
(b)  To reserve a field or other park entity, a permit will be required from the City Manager or his/her designee. Proof of reservation may be required at the site at any time during the reserved time. 
(c)  The field can be reserved a maximum of two times per week for a maximum of 90 minutes for each reservation period. 
(d)  Reservations of field will be done on a maximum monthly basis. 
(e)  Permit is only for time and specific location stated on the permit. Permit does not include supplies, equipment, etc. The permitted group must leave the multi-purpose field or other park structure or court by the time the permit expires. 
(f)  Permit is granted on condition that if the facility is needed for a Parks and Recreation Department function, grantee agrees to forgo use of facility. 
(g)  Person obtaining permit (18 years or older) is responsible for group's conduct and respect for the facility. Any groups who abuse facility or violate rules and regulations will not be issued any future permits, and charges for damage will be assessed and collected. 
(h)  The applicant hereby agrees that the use of such Parks and Recreation Department facilities shall be upon conditions listed above and at the exclusive risk of applicant and his/her guests, and no liability shall be attached to the Municipality of Powell, Ohio for any injury growing out of or arising from the use of said facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.18 - CRIMINAL OR PROHIBITED ACTIVITY. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any criminal or prohibited activity in those areas defined as parks in the Municipality of Powell, Ohio, pursuant to the provisions of any state, federal, or local law. 
(b)  Any person determined to be found guilty of a violation of any state, federal or local law shall be subject to the penalties provided by such state, federal, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
955.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of Sections 955.02, 955.04, 955.07, 955.10, 955.11 or 955.12 shall be determined to be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and imprisoned for a definite term not to exceed six months or fined not more than $1,000.00 or both. 
(b)  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of Sections 955.03, 955.08 or 955.09 shall be determined to be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense committed within a five year-period and fined not more than $100.00 and upon conviction of or a plea of guilty to each subsequent offense during a five year-period, such person shall be determined to be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and imprisoned for a definite term not to exceed 30 days or fined not more than $300.00 or both. 
(c)  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of Sections 955.05, 955.06 or 955.13 to 955.16 shall be determined to be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-62, 11-3-2004) 
PART ELEVEN - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE 
TITLE ONE - SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1101 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1101.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of Title One is to establish the procedures and minimum requirements for developing land in the Municipality of Powell, Ohio. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1101.02 - SCOPE. 
(a)  The criteria and procedures established in these Development Regulations pertain to providing public and/or private streets, sidewalks, parking lots, sewers, street lighting, driveways, and water lines; the grading of land and sighting of structures; and all other site work outside the exterior limits of a structure or structures, including the appurtenances and associated items, all in accordance with the standard drawings and requirements stated herein. 
(b)  Any addition to an existing building or change of a building's use that may increase the parking needs requires compliance with these regulations (Title One). 
(c)  These Development Regulations cover all improvements or development of land in the City except: 
(1)  The construction of a single or two-family dwelling on a platted or subdivided lot; and 
(2)  The alteration, modification or other work on or around an existing structure when such work does not change, require a change of, or add to the site improvements. For example, the rearranging of rooms in a building without adding floor space or parking needs does not require compliance with these regulations. However, the addition to an existing building or the changing of a building's use that increases the parking needs does require compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1101.03 - GOVERNING REGULATIONS. 
(a)  When there appears to be, or there is in fact, a conflict between these Development Regulations and the Zoning Code, the most stringent requirement shall apply. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements established herein, all required work shall be performed in the manner required and to the minimums established by Chapter 1113. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1101.04 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in these Development Regulations unless the context of any section of this Title One specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1101.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this Title One shall be fined not more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1103 - DEFINITIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning definitions, Ch. 1123 

1103.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the definitions of certain words as they are used in these Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1103.02 - SCOPE. 
    The definition of words given in this chapter shall be used in these Development Regulations unless the context of any section of any chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.03 - ACCEPTANCE OR APPROVAL. 
    Acceptance or Approval means the favorable vote by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Council on the plans for development which are submitted for their consideration, and the approval of installed improvements. 
(a)  Conditional acceptance means acceptance subject to stated conditions. Public improvements will receive a conditional acceptance subject to the correction of any deficiencies and a minimum one year maintenance period. 
(b)  Final acceptance of improvements means that in general the results of the construction work are in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1103.04 - BUILDING SETBACK LINE. 
    Building setback line means a line parallel to and at a fixed distance from the street, the purpose of which is to establish the minimum distance from a building to the street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.05 - DEVELOPMENT. 
    Development means the improvement of a tract or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.06 - EASEMENT. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner or owners of the use of a strip of land for a specific purpose or purposes. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.07 - IMPROVEMENTS. 
    Improvements mean any addition to the natural state of land which increases its value or utility, including buildings, street pavements with or without curbs and gutters, sidewalks, cross walks, waterlines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, landscaping, street lighting, public utilities, paved parking areas, and other appropriate items. 
(a)  Site improvements mean the improvements made to the land outside the exterior limits of a structure or structures. 
(b)  Public improvements mean all improvements financed entirely or in part by public funds or which have been dedicated to public use by plat, easement or deed of transfer. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.08 - LOT. 
    Lot means a measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plat or survey. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.09 - PARCEL. 
    Parcel means a specific part of a larger acreage of land. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.10 - PLAN. 
    Plan means a drawing showing the proportion and relation of parts of improvements to each other and their surroundings. 
(a)  Construction plan means a plan which gives information required to construct improvements including plan views, sections, profiles, details, quantities, reference specifications, and standard drawings. 
(b)  Final development plan means a plan which shows the existing ground and the proposed improvements on a tract or parcel of land in enough detail to establish the scope of the improvements, their relationship to the tract and surrounding tracts and to establish the development's compliance with, or to identify the variations from, these regulations. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan which shows the methods to be used to control the erosion of the site being developed, and to control the sedimentation downstream of the site being developed. 
(d)  Grading plan means a plan which shows the proposed grades for the development in a manner that reflects the scope of earthwork required and the finished site grades. 
(e)  Landscaping plan means a plan which shows the landscape improvements for the development in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Code. 
(f)  Plat means a plan of a tract or parcel of land made by a surveyor registered in the State of Ohio showing public dedications, property lines, lot lines and such other information as is required herein. 
(g)  Preliminary development plan means a plan which shows the existing grounds and the concept of the improvements on the tract or parcel of land to provide a basic understanding of the development. 
(h)  Site plan means a plan which shows information concerning all the site improvements, their relationship to each other, and the final shape and configuration of the site with improvements. 
(i)  Utility plan means a plan that shows the location of existing and proposed utilities. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1103.11 - RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    Right-of-way means the strip of land dedicated or otherwise acquired by the public for public use. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.12 - ROADWAY. 
    Roadway means the portion of a street intended for vehicular traffic. Roadways are normally constructed of all-weather, durable material of sufficient strength to adequately support the projected vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.13 - SIDEWALK. 
    Sidewalk means a hard surface portion of street, which lies outside the curb lines or edge of pavement of the roadway. Sidewalks may be constructed of concrete or brick. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.14 - STREET. 
    Street means any avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway or other way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, excluding driveways into single family, two-family or multi-family dwellings, or access to commercial or business establishments and their parking facilities. Streets shall be classified as follows: 
(a)  Alley means a public street, less than 25 feet wide, but more than ten feet wide, which affords access to the side and rear of abutting properties, and may include adjacent parking. 
(b)  Cul-de-Sac means a short, minor street having only one-end open for vehicular traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around or back-around. 
(c)  Dead-end street means a street with only one outlet. 
(d)  Downtown Connector means a relatively narrow public street providing connectivity between alleys, parking areas, residential, business, and mixed uses. 
(e)  Freeway (limited access highway) means a strip of public land devoted to rapid movement of vehicular traffic, to which the abutting property owners have no direct right of access. 
(f)  Industrial street means a street which is intended to carry heavy vehicular traffic primarily serving light or heavy industrial establishments. 
(g)  Local street means a street on which the majority of the traffic originates or terminates in the abutting properties. 
(h)  Primary street or thoroughfare means an arterial street or highway which serves as an outlet for a group of secondary and local streets. 
(i)  Private street means a strip of privately owned land providing access to abutting properties. 
(j)  Public street means a strip of land, as dedicated upon a plat, or as otherwise acquired by the City or other governmental agencies, the acquisition of which has been duly approved, filed, and recorded in the office of the County Recorder, for use by the public. 
(k)  Residential street means a street which primarily serves dwelling units. 
(l)  Secondary street means a street which primarily serves as a collector for local streets. 
(m)  Service road or access road means a minor street, parallel to a thoroughfare, to afford abutting property owners access to the thoroughfare at limited points. 
(n)  Stub road is a public or private street that abruptly ends at or near a property line with the intent to extend the street when the adjacent property develops. The intent of a stub street is to provide for an interconnected street system as recommended in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(o)  T-turn around means an arrangement at the end of a dead-end street which permits vehicles to be turned around by heading in, backing and then going forward. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1103.15 - STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    Street right-of-way means the line, sometimes referred to as the property line, between a lot and the area dedicated or otherwise acquired for public street purposes, otherwise known as dedicated right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.16 - SUBDIVISION. 
    Subdivision means: 
(a)  The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of the transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easement of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted or 
(b)  The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures, the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.17 - TRACT. 
    Tract means a continuous expanse of land. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.18 - WALK-WAY. 
    Walk-way means a dedicated public right-of-way limited to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.19 - ZONING. 
    Zoning means City regulations and limitations by districts, of the height, area and use of buildings, the use of lands and the density of population. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1103.20 - ZONING CODE. 
    Zoning Code means the Zoning Ordinance 84-45 including all ordinances or regulations subsequently passed which change, amend, replace or supersede all or any part of the Zoning Ordinance in force on the date submissions are made to the City in accordance with these Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1103.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of Title One shall be fined not more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1105 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Cornerstones and permanent markers, O.R.C.  711.03, 711.14 

1105.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to define types of development and establish the requirements for developing property in the City. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1105.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in this chapter unless the context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-986) 
1105.03 - TYPES OF DEVELOPMENTS. 
    For the purpose of establishing requirements and procedures for submission of materials to the City, developments are grouped into two types of development. 
(a)  Land can be developed as: 
(1)  A subdivision, as defined in Section 1103.16, or 
(2)  As the development of, or alteration to, an existing lot. This requirement does not pertain to the construction of one or two-family dwellings on platted lots. 
(b)  When there is a doubt as to the type of development being considered, the final determination will be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1105.04 - APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION WITHOUT PLAT. 
    A proposed division of a parcel of land along an existing public street, not involving the opening, widening or extension of any street or road, and involving no more than three lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided, may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval without plat. If the Commission acting through its properly designated representative is satisfied that such proposed division is not contrary to applicable platting, subdividing or zoning regulations, it shall within seven working days after submission approve such proposed division and, on presentation of a conveyance of said parcel, shall stamp the same "Approved by Planning and Zoning Commission; No Subdivision Plat Required" and have it signed by its Clerk, or designated representative. The request for approval of subdivision without plat shall include a deed map showing the boundaries of tract being subdivided, and the zoning classification of the tract. At such time as the subdivided tract is developed, submissions shall be made as described in Section 1105.09(b). 
(Ord. No. 88-19, 8-24-1988; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1105.05 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. 
    An owner who desires to develop any land shall provide and pay the entire cost of the following improvements needed to develop such land: 
(a)  Streets and parking areas, graded and paved, including drainage structures, bridges, and when required sidewalks and curbing; 
(b)  Sanitary sewers, including manholes, services and all appurtenances; 
(c)  Water distribution system including lines, services, valves, fire hydrants, and all appurtenances; 
(d)  Storm sewers, including manholes, inlets and all the appurtenances; 
(e)  Monuments and stakes; 
(f)  Street signs designating the name of each street at each intersection within the development and street signs at stub roads noting that a future street will be extended in the future. Street signs shall conform to the standards established by the City; 
(g)  Street lighting including poles, underground conduits and appurtenances at intersections and, when curbs and sidewalks are required, along the street; 
(h)  Landscaping; and 
(i)  Traffic control devices including regulatory, guide and warning signs, including posts and supports, lane line stripping, and directional arrows, to be located as directed by the City; 
(j)  All other improvements shown on the plans and as approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1105.06 - RECREATION FEE. 
    A Recreation Fee shall be collected in accordance with the Fee Schedule established by the Council and in force on the date the Recreation Fee is due and payable. All monies so collected shall be deposited for use to construct, erect, repair, purchase or otherwise obtain or upgrade parks and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 88-19, 8-24-1988; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1105.07 - DEVELOPMENT FEE. 
    A Development Fee shall be collected in accordance with the Fee Schedule established by the Council and in force on the date the Development Fee is due and payable. All monies so collected shall be deposited in accounts used to construct, repair, replace or upgrade public streets, storm drainage systems and sanitary sewer systems, or other development needs such as Council deems appropriate; including the legal, administrative and engineering services in support of the work described herein. 
(Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1105.08 - PLAN FILING AND REVIEW FEE. 
    A Plan Filing and Review Fee shall be collected in accordance with the Fee Schedule established by the Council and in force on the date the Plan Filing and Review Fee is due and payable. All monies so collected shall be deposited in accounts used to provide for engineering services to the City. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1105.09 - REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS. 
    The following submissions are required for each type of development. 
(a)  The Subdivision of Land with Plat shall require: 
(1)  A Sketch Plan, 
(2)  A Preliminary Development Plan, except as noted in subsection (d) hereof, 
(3)  A Development Plan, 
(4)  A Landscape Plan, 
(5)  A Plat for each development phase, 
(6)  Construction Plans, 
(7)  A Grading Plan, and 
(8)  An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
(9)  As determined by the City Engineer, a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and a post construction storm water operation and maintenance plan. 
(b)  The development or alteration to an existing lot or the subdivision of land without plat in conjunction with the development of the land shall require: 
(1)  A Sketch Plan, 
(2)  A Development Plan, 
(3)  A Landscape Plan, 
(4)  A Grading Plan, 
(5)  An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, and 
(6)  A Site and/or Utility Plan. 
(c)  The Preliminary Development Plan shall be submitted for the entire subdivision or development. The remaining Final Development Plan submissions shall only be for the phase being developed. 
(d)  In some cases the above listed plans can be combined together to decrease the total sets of plans. The procedure for this is described in Chapters 1107 and 1109. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1105.10 - OBLIGATIONS OF THE OWNER, CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEES, VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS. 
    In consideration of the approval of the Construction Plans, or when there are no public improvements, the Site and/or Utility Plans, the owner of the land being developed shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  No lot, parcel or tract shall be transferred until the owner has obtained the necessary approvals under the subdivision code and when required, the subdivision plat has been filed with the Delaware County Recorder. 
(b)  No conveyance shall be made of any lot or parcel smaller in frontage or area than indicated on the plat without the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(c)  All construction work and materials used in connection with site and public improvements shall conform to the requirements of the City, shall be observed as required by the City representative when being installed, and shall be installed at no expense to the City. Construction shall not commence until such time as the plans are approved pursuant to Section 1105.09, and the subdivision plat, if required, is also signed pursuant to Section 1107.08. 
(d)  The City Engineer shall be notified in writing three days before any construction is to begin. 
(e)  The owner shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all claims which might originate by virtue of the development of the subject premises or the conduct of the owner, its agents or employees relative to said development including, but not limited to, any and all claims for damages of every nature whatsoever or for injunctive relief emanating from the construction and improvements or resulting from the construction and improvements of said developed area; and the owner shall defend, at his own cost and expense, any suit or action brought against the City by reason thereof excluding, however, any such liability that might result from the sole negligence of the City. The owner acknowledges that owner or its agents or employees are knowledgeable developers who have utilized said knowledge and skill in developing the subject premises and though conforming to local regulations and ordinances of the City, owner is relying solely on his own expertise or the expertise of his developer in developing the subject premises; and the owner is not relying on any skill or expertise of the City, its agents or employees in preparing the developed area in accordance with sound engineering and development practices. 
(f)  All improvements and utilities will be satisfactorily installed within one year from the date of approval of the Construction, Site, or Utility Plans, as required herein or within such time schedule as presented and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Extended time limits for satisfactory installation of improvements associated with plans encompassing multiple phases of development may be granted at the discretion of the City Engineer. In such cases, each phase shall be substantially complete at the discretion of the City Engineer prior to the start of construction of the next successive phase, unless it is the intention of the development plan to conclude the installation of multiple phases at one time. 
(g)  Any extension of the time limits set in subsection (f) hereof must be approved by the City Engineer. Such approval shall be granted only upon a finding of a valid purpose and necessity for such extension and evidences of reasonable and diligent efforts toward accomplishment of the original Construction, Site, or Utility plans within the originally established time limits, and upon finding that such extension is not in conflict with the general health, welfare and safety of the public. No extension of time shall be granted except upon application filed in writing with the City Engineer not later than 30 days before the expiration of the time limits set in subsection (f) hereof. 
(h)  At, or prior to, the preconstruction meeting, prior to the beginning of construction of the public improvements, the developer or owner shall guarantee the construction of the public improvements by filing with the City evidence satisfactory to the City Engineer and Law Director of one of the following: 
(1)  A performance bond equal to 120 percent of the estimated construction cost as approved by the City Engineer of the public improvements, with the provision that the bond proceeds shall be used to cover the cost of contractors, subcontractors, material men, laborers, and other costs to the City of Powell to complete the project upon default by the owner. The performance bond shall not expire until such times as the public improvements are complete and receive conditional acceptance by the City and at such time as the maintenance guarantee is posted; or 
(2)  A certified check equal to 100 percent of the estimated construction cost of the public improvement; or 
(3)  Subject to the approval of the Law Director, a certificate of deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit made out to the City, equal to 100 percent of the estimated construction cost, as approved by the City Engineer, of the public improvements. The certificate of deposit or letter of credit shall not expire until such time as the public improvements are complete and receive conditional acceptance by the City and at such time as the maintenance guarantee is posted. 
(4)  For small projects (of less than one acre) which does not have a substantial public improvement, and the improvement is not determined to be a critically important public improvement, at the discretion of the City Engineer, the owner may not be required to submit a performance guarantee as outlined above. However, the owner is still obligated to perform the improvements within the approved plans and the Zoning Administrator may withhold a Certificate of Zoning Compliance (occupancy) if the improvement is not completed prior to the facility being ready to occupy their development. 
(i)  All permits and approvals shall be obtained and all fees and deposits paid prior to beginning any construction of any improvements. 
(j)  During construction and prior to acceptance of any public improvement, the owner shall remove or cause to be removed such dirt and debris and foreign matter from all public rights-of-way, improvements and/or easements as were deposited, left or resulted from the construction of improvements of any nature for the development, within 24 hours after being notified by the City that such removal is required. Such removal shall be done to the satisfaction of the City. 
(k)  A development agreement shall be executed in such form and on such terms and conditions as specified by the City Engineer and Solicitor. 
(l)  No person or owner shall violate any of the regulations established in these Development Regulations and upon violation the City shall have the right to: 
(1)  Stop all work on the project forthwith upon the City having posted a notice to stop work at the development site. 
(2)  Continue any unfinished work or replace any unaccepted work to a point that any public improvements do not appear to create a health or safety hazard or create maintenance or repair expense to the City because of their state of completion by: 
A.  Holding the bonding company responsible for all actual expenses incurred, including engineering, legal and construction expenses, plus interest as defined in subsection (g)(1) hereof, from the date of default by the owner and/or his contractor or representatives, to the date the City receives reimbursement for all expenses incurred, or 
B.  Using the certified check, or proceeds thereof, or proceeds of the certificate of deposit or the letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1105.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. The enforcement of the fines described herein shall be separate and distinct from the exercising of any City right described in Section 1105.10. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1107 - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Plat and contents, O.R.C.  711.01 et seq.; Plat acknowledgement and recording, O.R.C.  711.06; Approval by Planning Authority, O.R.C.  711.09 

1107.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the submission procedures for developing property in the City. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1107.02 - SCOPE. 
    The following procedures shall be followed from the time the land to be developed is properly zoned for the proposed development through the completion of all improvements. All plans and documents required herein shall be prepared and submitted at no cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1107.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in this chapter unless the context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1107.035 - POSTING OF NOTICE SIGN. 
    At least ten days prior to a public hearing or public meeting about land development proposals, the applicant shall post a sign, as designed by the Zoning Administrator but provided by the applicant, that gives notice to the public with regard that a proposal is being reviewed by the City, and provides a City telephone number and web site in order to get information about the current proposal. Such sign shall remain posted until the project is finished with its public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.04 - SKETCH PLAN. 
(a)  An owner wishing to develop land should submit five copies of a Sketch Plan, and such other information as the owner desires, to the Planning and Zoning Commission 15 days prior to the date of the Commission meeting. 
(b)  The Commission shall review the Sketch Plan with the owner and provide the owner with comments during the meeting, it being understood that no statement by officials of the City shall be binding upon either. This submission is informal and for the purpose of establishing communication and discussing the concept for developing the tract. No formal action will be taken on the Sketch Plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.05 - PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN, NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS. 
(a)  Following the discussion of the Sketch Plan for a development, the owner shall submit five copies of a Preliminary Development Plan and such other information as the owner desires, to the Planning and Zoning Commission 15 days prior to the date of the Commission meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission Clerk shall then, by letter, notify property owners within 250 feet of the subject property of the pending consideration of a Preliminary Development Plan. This notice shall be mailed not less than seven days prior to the meeting. 
(b)  The Commission shall review the Preliminary Development Plan at its next meeting and provide the owner with comments regarding the overall concept of the development. The Commission will approve the Preliminary Development Plan, disapprove the Plan, or take no action subject to the Plan being revised. Upon approval, the Preliminary Development Plan shall be forwarded to Council for their information. 
(c)  If the Preliminary Development Plan is disapproved or no action is taken, the notices to the property owners shall be sent out as described above upon the resubmission of the Preliminary Development Plan. The resubmission shall be made 15 days prior to the Commission meeting in which the Preliminary Development Plan is to be reconsidered. 
(d)  In the instance of developing or alternating a lot, a Preliminary Development Plan is not required. 
(e)  The approval of the Preliminary Development Plan shall be effective for: 
(1)  The period of time as set forth in subsection (f) below. 
(2)  The period of time as established in the approval, or 
(3)  The period of time provided by the granting of time extensions or the establishment of a schedule in the approval of a Development Plan for a phase of the development shown on the Preliminary Development Plan. 
(f)  The approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be null and void for all undeveloped portions of a development as shown on the Preliminary Development Plan: 
(1)  If a Development Plan has not been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for the first phase of development within 12 months of the Preliminary Development Plan approval or on the schedule as established in the approval of the previous Development Plan. 
(2)  If a Development Plan has not been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for the next phase of development within 12 months of the conditional acceptance by the City of a preceding phase of development or on a schedule as established in the approval of the previous Development Plan. 
(3)  If the time limits as stated herein or as stated in Section 1107.06 for the Development Plan have been exceeded and no time extension has been granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.06 - FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 
(a)  Upon receiving approval of the Preliminary Development Plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the owner shall submit five copies of a Final Development Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission, 15 days prior to the Commission meeting in which it is to be considered. The Final Development Plan may be for one or more phases, or the entire development. 
(b)  When the Preliminary Development Plan is not required or is combined with the Final Development Plan, the submission procedures stated in Section 1107.05 for the Preliminary Development Plan shall be followed. 
(c)  The Commission shall examine and take action on the Final Development Plan within 45 days after it has been filed. The owner may withdraw the Final Development Plan from consideration by the Commission any time before the Commission takes action, in which case the 45 day time limit shall start over when the Final Development Plan is resubmitted. 
(d)  The approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be effective for: 
(1)  Nine months, or as established on the approved Final Development Plan, unless the plans and specifications as required in Section 1105.09 have been submitted to the City Engineer. 
(2)  Twelve months, or as established on the approved Final Development Plan, unless construction has begun. 
(e)  A Landscape Plan shall be submitted as part of or in conjunction with the Final Development Plan. The approval of the Final Development Plan shall include the approval of the Landscape Plan. The approval of the Landscape Plan shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as is the approval of the Final Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1983; Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.07 - DEVELOPER'S AGREEMENT. 
    Upon the approval of the Final Development Plan and prior to the submission of a plat, when a plat is required, or the Utility and Site Plans, when a plat is not required, a Developer's Agreement in such form and such terms as are required by the City shall be signed. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.08 - PLAT. 
    Upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Development Plan, a plat shall be submitted for subdivisions in which land will be dedicated for public use. Five copies of the plat shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission 15 days prior to the date of next Commission meeting. The Commission shall take action on the Plat within 30 days after the Plat has had its first hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon approval by the Commission the Plat shall be forwarded to Council for its consideration. Council shall take action on the Plat within 60 days after receiving the Plat from the Planning and Zoning Commission. A two-thirds majority of Council is required for council to reverse a recommendation of the Commission. The owner shall file the Plat with the Delaware County Recorder within 12 months of its approval by Council, unless this time is extended by Council, or the approvals of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.09 - SUBMISSION OF CONSTRUCTION DATA. 
(a)  Following the approval of the Development Plan and Plat, the owner shall submit to the City Engineer two copies of the plans required in Section 1105.09, along with the design calculations and reference data, and an itemized cost for constructing the public and site improvements. 
(b)  Prior to the beginning of construction, a digital copy and one print will be given to the City Engineer of the approved Development Plan and when appropriate, the recorded plat. 
(c)  When a plat is not required or the development does not involve installing any public improvements, the information for the site improvements shall be shown on a Site and Utility Plan. 
(d)  The Engineer shall review the plans and construction estimates and, subject to this satisfaction, they shall be approved or returned with comments. 
(e)  Upon approval of the construction plans or site and utility plans, reproducible copies meeting the requirements of subsection (b) hereof and three sets of prints shall be given to the City Engineer. The Engineer may permit the developer's engineer to retain the reproducible copies until such time as the "as-built" information is added. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 88-19, 8-24-1988; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.10 - FEES, GUARANTEES, WRITTEN NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION. 
Prior to the beginning of any construction: 
(a)  At such time as the owner desires to begin construction, the owner shall guarantee the construction of the public improvements in accordance with Section 1105.10. 
(b)  All appropriate fees, deposits, and construction guarantees shall be made, and deposited with the City. 
(c)  All requirements listed in this chapter have been completed and the City Engineer has given written approval to begin construction. 
(d)  The City Engineer has received written notification 72 hours before construction is to begin. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1107.11 - OWNERSHIP OF PLANS, AS-BUILT PLANS. 
    When the proper City officials have affixed their signatures to a set of reproducible drawings of public improvements, such drawings become the property of, and will remain in the custody of, the City, except that the developer will be required to correct the plans to conform to the "as-built" conditions. Public improvements will not be accepted by the City until the "as-built" reproducibles are delivered to the Engineer, together with two prints thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1107.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1109 - PLAN CONTENT AND REQUIREMENTS[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Plat and contents, O.R.C.  711.01 et seq.; Engineer to approve plats, O.R.C.  711.08, 711.09 

1109.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum information required for the plans which are required in Section 1105.09. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1109.02 - SCOPE. 
    The plans shall be submitted as indicated, containing the information required herein. It is recognized that in some cases the requested information does not pertain. For example, deed restrictions may not be proposed for a small development. In these instances, the submission should state which items for that submission are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in Development Regulations unless the context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.04 - USGS ELEVATIONS. 
    The elevations shown on all plans shall be based on the National Geodetic Survey's North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1109.05 - PLAN SCALE. 
    The Plan Scale for Sketch Plans and Preliminary Development Plans shall be no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. The plan scale for all other plans and the plat shall be no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.06 - SKETCH PLAN. 
    A Sketch Plan shall be submitted as stipulated herein and include: 
(a)  Proposed name of development and location; 
(b)  Names and addresses of owners and developers; 
(c)  Date, north arrow and plan scale; 
(d)  Approximate boundary lines of proposed development; 
(e)  Major existing features including topography; 
(f)  Major proposed improvements and a general layout of development; 
(g)  The basic development information such as minimum lot size and dimension, type and size of building, and street and drainage patterns; 
(h)  For tracts that contain wooded areas or stands of trees, a statement of the procedure to be used to identify and preserve sound, healthy trees; 
(i)  For tracts that contain ravines or natural drainage courses, a statement of the extent of, and procedures for their preservation; 
(j)  Such other information as requested by the Director of Development; and 
(k)  Such other information as will be necessary to give the Commission the proposed concept. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1109.07 - PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 
    A Preliminary Development Plan shall be submitted as stipulated herein. A Preliminary Development Plan shall include: 
(a)  Proposed name of the development and its location; 
(b)  Names and addresses of owners and developers; 
(c)  Date, north arrow and plan scale; 
(d)  Boundary lines of the proposed development and the total approximate acreage encompassed therein; 
(e)  Locations, widths, and names of all existing public streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way or easements, parks and other public open spaces, permanent structures, and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract; 
(f)  Existing sewers, waterlines, culverts, and other underground facilities within the tract, adjacent to the tract or that will be used in developing the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades, and locations; 
(g)  The adjoining lines of adjacent tracts, parcels or lots; 
(h)  Existing zoning restrictions; 
(i)  Existing ground configurations, drainage channels, wooded areas, watercourses and other significant physical features; 
(j)  Identification of the tree preservation procedures and areas; 
(k)  Layout with approximate dimensions of proposed streets, including tentative locations for sewers, waterlines, culverts, private utilities, and other major improvement; 
(l)  Tentative layout, numbering and the approximate dimensions of lots if more than one; 
(m)  The approximate area of the smallest and largest lots, the proposed total number of lots, the lot yield based on total acres and the acres without street right-of-way; 
(n)  Tentative layout, location, elevation views, finish materials and colors, and approximate dimensions of proposed buildings, except for single and two family subdivisions; 
(o)  Layout of site improvements including parking lots, driveways, landscape areas, trash container lighting, and fencing, except for single and two family subdivisions; 
(p)  Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or reserved by deed covenant, with the conditions proposed for such covenant, and for the dedications; 
(q)  Proposed building setback lines with dimensions; 
(r)  Grading concepts of the lots, streets and pavement with explanation of methods for handling off-site drainage, both that which enters the development and that which leaves the development; and also provide feasibility analysis of proposed on-site and/or off-site storm water management concept. 
(s)  Proposed deed restrictions and covenants; 
(t)  A statement of the tentative schedule of phases of development; 
(u)  A statement of the general effect the development will have on schools, public services and traffic patterns; 
(v)  A statement of the character and nature of the development including the cost range or rent levels for housing in residential developments and the general types of business for industrial and commercial developments, and 
(w)  A listing of any proposed deviations and variances from the Development Regulations or the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1109.08 - DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 
    A Development Plan shall be submitted for each phase of a project as stipulated herein and shall include: 
(a)  The listed items in Section 1109.07(a) through (w) for the Preliminary Development Plan, with such refinements as may have resulted from the review of the Preliminary Development Plan; 
(b)  A response to comments during the review of the Preliminary Development Plan through written comments or changes in the proposed layout and improvements for the development; 
(c)  Tentative grading of the streets and lots, with approximate sewer and ditch sizes and slopes; 
(d)  Deed restrictions and covenants; 
(e)  A statement of the proposed restrictions, if any, on the type and nature of building materials, type of construction and configuration of structures. If architectural controls are to be a part of the development, a statement of how the architectural control will be handled as the property in the development changes ownership; 
(f)  A listing of any proposed deviations or variances from these Development Regulations or the Zoning Code; and 
(g)  An updating of the Development Plan for completed phases of the development, revisions to the schedule of completion, revisions to the development phases, and any other changes from previous Development Plans. The updating of the development information may be done on a reproducible copy of the original Preliminary Development Plan if the required information can be clearly shown. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
Cross reference- Procedures for approval of Planned District Development Plans,  1143.11(i) 
1109.09 - LANDSCAPE PLAN. 
    A Landscape Plan shall be submitted for each phase of a Development as part of, or in conjunction with, the Development Plan. The Landscape Plan shall follow the requirements of the Zoning Code and shall include: 
(a)  The project title, north arrow, location map or description and sheet scale; 
(b)  The proposed site improvements; 
(c)  Sufficient dimensions to locate the proposed landscaping with respect to the proposed site improvements; 
(d)  Names and planting sizes and plants, shrubs and trees; 
(e)  Location of the existing major trees and a description of the methods to be used to preserve those which will remain; 
(f)  The identification of the existing major trees to be removed, and; 
(g)  For these situations in which no new trees are required or are to be installed, an indication of the existing trees to be used to meet the tree planting requirement. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.10 - PLAT. 
    A Plat shall be submitted as stipulated herein and shall include: 
(a)  The boundary of the development, based on an accurate transverse with dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds; 
(b)  The municipal, township, county, section or adjacent property lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings; 
(c)  The radii, central angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and lengths of all chord dimensions; 
(d)  All lot lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds; 
(e)  An accurate location of all monuments and of all iron pins to be set on street right-of-way lines at street intersections and at the beginning and end of curves; 
(f)  The exact location, width and name of all existing streets, easements and public lands; 
(g)  The name and location of the development; 
(h)  The names of owners; 
(i)  The date, north arrow and scale of plat; 
(j)  The names and deed book references of adjacent property owners; 
(k)  An accurate boundary data of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners; 
(l)  A certificate by a land surveyor, registered in the State of Ohio, that the premises covered by the plat have been surveyed, that the plat is correct, and that the monuments shown on the plat will be set in accordance with Section 1111.11; 
(m)  A notarized certification by the owner or owners of their adoption of the plat and the dedication of the streets and other public areas to public use as is shown on the plat; 
(n)  Proper form for the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission with space for signatures; 
(o)  A space for approval signatures of the City Engineer and Mayor; 
(p)  A proper form for approval and acceptance by Council, with space for ordinance number and also space for the signature and certification of the Clerk of Council; and 
(q)  The space for notation of transfer by the County Auditor and recording by the County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.11 - CONSTRUCTION PLANS. 
    Construction Plans shall be prepared for all public sanitary sewers, water lines, streets, pavements, sidewalks and storm sewers which are proposed for construction. 
(a)  The format and information contained on the sanitary sewer plans shall conform to the requirements of the Delaware County Sewer District, and the waterline plans shall conform to the requirements of DelCo Water company. 
(b)  All other plans shall be made on mylar or other accepted material sizes 24 inches by 36 inches, with a one-inch border on the left and a one-half inch border around the balance of the sheet. The relationship between the proposed work and the existing topography conditions shall be shown. Both the existing conditions and proposed work shall be shown in both plan and profile on the same sheet, and in sufficient detail to clearly show all work to be done. Plans shall contain general notes and a summary of estimated quantities. All drawings shall be made in ink and a title block shall be included in the lower right hand corner of each sheet except on the title sheet. Spaces shall be provided on the first sheet for the approval signatures of the Mayor, City Engineer, and Zoning Administrator. It is permissible for the waterline and sanitary improvement to be included in the street and storm drainage plans. 
(c)  The general notes shall include a reference to the specifications required in Chapter 1113. 
(d)  Supplemental specifications may be submitted as separate documents on eight and one-half by 11 paper or may be added onto the plans. Other electronic means of submittal may be allowed by the City Engineer. 
(e)  The first sheet for the plans shall include location map, development title, required signature spaces, standard drawing lists and index when required. 
(f)  The routing of construction traffic to the development and within the development shall be included. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1109.12 - SITE AND UTILITY PLANS. 
    Site and/or Utility Plans may be prepared in lieu of Construction Plans for any development that does not require a plat or for any portion of a development that does not involve installing public improvements. The plans shall accurately show the horizontal and vertical location of the utility and site improvements in sufficient detail to fully describe the improvements. The plans shall also show existing topography and utilities for the land being developed, as well as enough of the adjacent lots or area to show what effect the proposed improvements will have on the existing utilities and adjacent lots or area. The plans shall include a location map, development title, scale, north arrow, and references to the City development standards and requirements. The scale shall be one inch equals 50 feet or a larger scale. All site improvements for any development shall be shown on Construction Plans, Site Plans or Utility Plans. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.13 - GRADING PLANS. 
    A Grading Plan shall be prepared for all developments covered under this regulation. The Grading Plan may be combined with other plans, if such a combination is neat and the information easily read. The Grading Plan shall show: 
(a)  The development title, sheet scale, north arrow and location map, unless it is made a part of a set of plans that contains this information; 
(b)  The floor elevations for first floor and all floors below grade of proposed structures; 
(c)  The proposed elevations, slopes, and grade of the site improvements; and 
(d)  All grading and drainage details and specifications not contained in the Construction Plans, Site Plans, or Utility Plans. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1109.14 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. 
    An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be prepared for all developments covered by this regulation which require improvements to more than one acre of land. 
    For subdivided developments where the erosion and sediment control plan does not call for a centralized sediment control capable of controlling multiple individual lots, a detail drawing of a typical individual lot showing standard individual lot erosion and sediment control practices shall be provided to the City Engineer. This does not remove the responsibility to designate specific erosion and sediment control practices in the erosion and sediment control plan for critical areas such as steep slopes, stream banks, drainage ways and riparian zones. 
    The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan may be combined with other plans, if such a combination is neat and the information easily read. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall not meet the minimum design requirements identified by Chapter 1111. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for a proposed development area, with maps drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20 feet, shall be submitted containing the following information: 
(a)  The development title, sheet scale, north arrow, and location map, unless it is made a part of the construction plans or the grading plan; 
(b)  Location of the area and its relationship to its general surroundings, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Offsite areas susceptible to sediment deposits or to erosion caused by accelerated runoff; and 
(2)  Offsite areas affecting potential accelerated runoff and erosion control; 
(c)  Existing topography of the development area and adjacent land within 200 feet of the boundaries. The topographic mapping should contain an appropriate contour interval to clearly portray the confirmation and drainage pattern of the area; 
(d)  The location of existing buildings; structures; utilities; water bodies; drainage facilities, vegetative cover; a general description of the predominant soil types and their location; paved areas (streets, roads, driveways, sidewalks, etc.) and other significant natural or man-made features on the development area and adjacent land within 200 feet of the boundaries; 
(e)  Name and location of the immediate receiving stream or surface water(s) and the first subsequent named receiving water(s); 
(f)  Surface water locations including springs, wetlands, streams, lakes, water wells, etc., on or within 200 feet of the site; including the boundaries of wetlands or stream channels and first subsequent named receiving water(s) the permittee intends to fill or relocate for which the permittee is seeking approval from the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA, if applicable. 
(g)  The areal extent and description of wetlands or other special aquatic sites at or near the site which will be disturbed or which will receive discharges from disturbed areas of the project; 
(h)  Proposed use of the development area including present development and ultimate utilization with detail on soil cover, both vegetative and impervious (total impervious area in acres and as a percentage of the whole area). The location of unstable or highly erodable soils shall be shown on the plans; 
(1)  Makeup of proposed surface soil (upper six inches) on areas not covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. Description shall be in such terms as: original surface soil, subsoil, sandy, heavy, clay, stony, etc. 
(2)  Proposed kind of cover on areas not covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. Description shall be in such terms as: lawns, turfgrass, shrubbery, trees, forest cover, rip-rap, mulch, etc. 
(i)  Delineate areas for the storage or disposal of solid, sanitary and toxic wastes, including dumpster areas, areas designated for cement truck washout, and vehicle refueling, when applicable; 
(j)  Identify locations designated for construction entrances and means for controlling sediment at said locations; 
(k)  All proposed earth disturbance including: 
(1)  Areas of excavation, grading, and filling. 
(2)  The finished grades. 
(3)  Proposed kind of cover on areas not covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. Description shall be in such terms as: lawn, turfgrass, shrubbery, trees, forest cover, rip-rap, mulch, etc. 
(4)  Proposed, paved and covered area in square feet or to scale on the Plan. 
(5)  Delineation of drainage watersheds expected during and after major grading activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed, in acres. 
(6)  Description of the quality of any discharge from the site (pre-and post-construction). 
(7)  The location of any in-stream activities, including stream crossings; 
(l)  Design computations and applicable assumptions for determining soil loss and the erosion and sediment control facilities. Refer to Chapter 1111 for settling requirements. Volume and velocity of flow must be given for all surface water conveyance. This information shall also be provided for surface water outlets. 
(m)  The calculation for determination of the runoff coefficients for both the pre- and post-construction site conditions; 
(n)  The locations and procedures for maintaining the erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities during the construction and maintenance periods, which extends through the lifetime of the facility; 
(o)  Proposed construction sequence and time schedule for all earth disturbing activities and installation of provisions for erosion and stormwater management; 
(p)  The procedures and specifications for temporary and permanent seeding during construction and prior to acceptance of the development by the City; 
(q)  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities including easements to insure short as well as long term erosion and sediment pollution control and storm water management; 
(r)  Provisions for the management of stormwater, derived both on-site and from upper watershed areas, including the control of accelerated on-site, runoff, to a stable receiving outlet; 
(s)  All temporary and permanent drainage facilities, channels, and grassways that will be used to control erosion and retain sediment, debris and waste material; 
(t)  The procedures to be followed to correct any erosion and remove any deposits of sediment, debris and waste materials that develop downstream of the development due in part or in total to the improvements in the development; 
(u)  Names and address of the person(s) preparing the plan, the owner, and the person responsible for the development area; 
(v)  Certification that all earth disturbance, construction, and development will be done pursuant to the plan; 
(w)  Estimate of cost of erosion and sediment control and water management structures and features; 
(x)  A copy of the Notice of Intent application to use Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and/or OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or subsequent issuances of these permits, shall be provided to the City with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
The approving agency may waive specific requirements for plan detail or may require additional information to show that work will conform to basic requirements of the ordinance; 
(y)  All proposed utilities and proposed locations of installation; 
(z)  Seeding mixtures and rates, lime and fertilizer application rates, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 3-15-2011) 
1109.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00 per offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1111 - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Inspection of streets and acceptance, O.R.C.  711.09; Minimum lot area, O.R.C.  711.09 

1111.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum requirements for the layout and design of the site improvements for developing land in the Municipality of Powell. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992) 
1111.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in this chapter unless the context of any section of this Chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992) 
1111.03 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Any deviation from these Minimum Design Standards must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Engineer. 
(b)  All development plans shall have provisions for the future development of adjoining land, including such utility and street extensions as are necessary to serve the adjoining land. 
(c)  Every lot should abut a public street, but shall not border more than one public street except at intersections, when one border is an alley, or when one such border is on a controlled access thoroughfare. At the intersection of two streets, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc of a minimum of a ten-foot radius. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles with or radial to the street line. Lots shall be of adequate size and shape to accommodate the off-street parking requirements and to meet front, side and rear yard requirements of the Zoning Code. 
(d)  The maximum length of a block should not exceed 1,200 feet and the minimum width of a block should be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. 
(e)  Sites as required by the Municipality for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public use shall be reserved for a period of one year after building permits have been issued for 50 percent of the lots in the last phase of the development. If the developer or owner wishes to develop the site or sites which have not been purchased or secured by option within the one-year period, the developer or owner shall notify the Municipality that the one-year period has expired. If the Municipality has not purchased or secured by option the site or sites within 90 days of receipt by the Municipality of such notice, the developer or owner is free to dispose of or use the reserved site or sites. 
(f)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide on residential streets. Widths on other streets will be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(g)  All easements granted to or reserved by the Municipality shall be at least 20 feet wide except that an easement may be less when: 
(1)  It is for the purpose of installing and maintaining Municipality-owned underground electrical conduit, or similar utility; or 
(2)  An easement borders another easement or a public right-of-way, part of which can be used for the purpose of the easement. 
Notwithstanding the above, all easements and easement/right-of-way combinations shall be wide enough to insure that the easement limit is five feet away from the utility within the easement. 
(h)  All disturbed surface areas not covered by structures or a hard surface improvement shall be covered with stone or shall be seeded or sodded, and sloped to drain. All grass or stone areas shall have a minimum slope or grade of eight-tenths percent; except that the ground next to buildings shall slope away from the building at a five percent grade for a minimum of ten feet. 
(i)  All residential lots of one acre or less shall have a length no longer than three times the width at the building line. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.04 - STREETS. 
    Streets shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The pavement details and sections shall be at least equivalent to those set forth in the Powell Standard Drawings in force on the date the construction plans are submitted for approval. 
(a)  Roadway pavement and right-of-way standards shall be as follows: 
Type Street Pavement 
width (feet) Right-of-Way Width (feet) 
Without Curb Max 
Grade % Min 
Center 
Line Radius Back To 
Back of 
Curbs Edge To 
Edge of 
Pavement 
(no curb) With 
Curbs Ditch 
Sect. Yard Sect. Primary or Thoroughfare 64' 48' 100' 104' 100' 5% 350' Secondary 44' 36' 80' 88' 80' 5% 250' Local (public) 29' 24' 60' 76' 68' 8% 120' Downtown connector 27'-28' 22'-24' 50' 45' * 8% 120' Downtown connector w/ parallel parking 27'-28' * 50' * * 8% 120' Alley w/ 90 degree parking varies varies 50' * * 8% * Alley 24' 16'-20' 30' 20-25' * 8% *  
* Standard shall be established on a case by case basis upon review of the street alignment by the City Engineer. 
(b)  The minimum grade for any street at the gutter shall be five-tenths percent. 
(c)  Streets shall be laid out so that their intersections with other streets are at least 200 feet apart. 
(d)  The angle of the intersections of any two streets shall vary no more than five degrees from being perpendicular or radial. 
(e)  The names of new streets shall not duplicate names of existing dedicated streets, except that new streets which are extensions of existing streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. All other new streets shall be designated in the following manner: 
General Direction Over 1,000 
ft. in length Under 1,000 
ft. in length North and South Streets Places East and West Avenues Courts Diagonal Roads Ways Curving Drives Circles  
(f)  When the developer desires to improve only a portion of the streets in a development, tentative street grades and the sizing of drainage facilities shall be submitted for enough of the surrounding area to show that the proposed grades and sizes are compatible with the information shown on the Development Plan. A street improvement shall be constructed in front of and along the side line of all corner lots in the portion of the development being developed. 
(g)  All streets shall have curbs except as stated herein: 
(1)  Streets in residential developments with minimum one-half acre lots that have an average lot frontage width at the building setback line of 125 feet or more may use the yard section. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial developments with minimum lot sizes larger than one acre and minimum lot frontage wider than 200 feet may use the yard section or the ditch section. 
(h)  Thoroughfares (primary streets), shall be located as shown on the approved Municipal Thoroughfare Plan. The specific location of thoroughfares in undeveloped areas may be altered, with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, from the Thoroughfare Plan's general location in order to improve the compatibility of the thoroughfare with the proposed development. 
(i)  On-street parking is prohibited for all streets that do not have curbing or curb and gutter. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.05 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. 
    It is the intent of these minimum requirements to provide for the increased stormwater runoff from the development of land so as to minimize the impact on existing and natural drainage systems. While the requirements set forth herein will not stop flooding or the damage caused by flooding, they do establish a basis for design which will: 
(a)  Minimize the damage and inconvenience of floodings; 
(b)  Provide drainage systems which continue to benefit their tributary area over the long term; 
(c)  Minimize the adverse effects of new drainage systems on existing systems; and 
(d)  Minimize the expense of maintaining the drainage facilities within the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992) 
1111.051 - DRAINAGE POLICY. 
(a)  The drainage policy, control guidelines and criteria do not provide solutions to all drainage problems, nor is the engineer restricted to these designs or procedures exclusively. Although the policies as stated will hold true for most development work, the Municipality realizes that there may be individual projects involving special or unusual drainage design problems that should be reviewed prior to completing the development Master Drainage Plan. Exceptions may be granted to the policies and criteria in such cases when engineering studies show justify modifications. 
(b)  Experience has shown that most of the more serious flooding situations are "created." Development can lead to ever increasing flooding problems unless well-conceived, cooperative stormwater drainage and flood control programs are undertaken throughout the entire watershed. For this reason, the general policy of Powell shall be: 
(1)  All information necessary shall be submitted to the Municipality to determine if the stormwater rate of runoff should be controlled within the development prior to its release to downstream properties. The tributary area and the upstream watersheds should be determined using natural land divides unless man-made alterations are approved by the City Engineer as the basis for watershed delineations. 
(2)  All stormwater drainage facilities within a development shall be designed to have capacity and depth, including sufficient invert elevations to permit future connections, to serve that total tributary area at the design storm frequency, and based on the rate of single family, residential runoff except as noted in subsection (3) below. The system for the upstream tributary area must be extended through the development. Upstream watersheds should be determined using natural divides unless manmade alternatives are approved by the City Engineer as the basis for watershed delineations. 
(3)  All proposed development with a runoff rate greater than that which the downstream system has capacity for, or will be designed for, will be required to control the rate of stormwater discharge. 
(4)  All developments having existing controls located downstream from the site will be required to control the flow rate of stormwater discharge to that rate which existed prior to development. 
(5)  It is the responsibility of the property owner to not change or alter any drainage course, ditch or drainage system on his property that will damage or cause flooding to adjacent, upstream or downstream property owners. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.052 - DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Purpose. These design standards and specifications shall serve as the minimum requirements for the handling of surface water and drainage. These procedures and standards shall govern the development of all new or modified drainage systems. The development of such drainage systems shall include the conveyance of surface water to an adequate outlet which is capable of carrying the flow. The engineer's highest design priority shall be to eliminate the possibility of any major loss of property or any loss of life. 
(b)  Adequate Drainage Outlet. Surface water runoff from a development shall be drained off site to an adequate drainage outlet. The location of the outlet shall be approved by the City Engineer and may consist of a ditch, stream, storm sewer, or approved detention basin having sufficient capacity to accommodate the surface water runoff in an engineered manner. 
(c)  Drainage Easement. 
(1)  An adequate easement may be required along any tile, detention basin, drainage way, ditch, watercourse, natural stream, man-made stream, storm sewer or any other watercourse deemed necessary by either the City Engineer, or the Public Service Director (hereinafter "Public Service Director" or "Director") which is not already within the street right-of-way. The easement shall be of sufficient width to allow cleaning, widening, deepening, replacing or other general maintenance of such drainage course. 
(2)  When it is necessary to convey stormwater outside the property lines of a proposed improved area in order to discharge into an adequate outlet, the Developer (i) shall be responsible to obtain easements and/or maintenance agreements, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Public Service Director, from abutting property owners, and (ii) shall remain responsible for maintenance of such drainage course unless the easements and/or maintenance agreements require the abutting property owners to repair and maintain the drainage course satisfactorily. 
(3)  Any required drainage easements shall be shown on the final plat and the "final engineering and construction plan." Such drainage easements shall be recorded for public use relating to stormwater conveyance. With the exception of City maintained publicly accepted storm sewers and appurtenances, maintenance of such drainage easements shall be undertaken in the manner set forth in subsection (c)(4) below. 
(4)  In addition to any applicable provisions of Sections 906.02 and 906.03, the Public Service Director is hereby authorized to inspect such drainage easement drainage courses and if the Director determines that maintenance is needed, the Director shall notify the property owner on which the maintenance is required and/or any other parties who, in the sole determination of the Director, directly benefit from such easement, that such maintenance is required as follows: 
A.  The Director shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner and/or any other parties benefiting from the easement notifying such parties that maintenance of the drainage course is necessary and that a contract with a contractor acceptable to the Director for such repair and maintenance should be delivered to the Director within 14 days of the notice. The notice shall be served upon the property owner and/or benefited parties at the tax billing address for such premises reflected upon the records of the Delaware County Auditor. Service shall be accomplished by any means permitted for service of Summons under the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. Each property affected by such notice shall also be posted with such notice by the Director. 
B.  In those instances where the address of the owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish a notice once a week in a newspaper of general circulation in Delaware County, Ohio setting forth the substance of the notice and time frame for compliance. The time frame for compliance shall be no less than 14 days after the publication. 
C.  If the property owner and/or benefiting parties fail to comply with the notice, the City shall cause such repairs, replacement, maintenance and abatement procedures to be implemented as determined appropriate by the Director. The cost of such repair, replacement, abatement and other procedures deemed appropriate by the Director shall be immediately due and payable to the City in the amounts and in the proportions determined by the Director. Additionally, the Director may assess an administrative fee as the Director deems appropriate against each property owner or benefiting party in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per property owner and/or benefited party for each instance where a notice is served under this section. The cost and administrative fee shall be due and payable within 30 days after the same are assessed. 
D.  If any fees or costs remain unpaid for a period in excess of 30 days, in addition to any other remedy available to the City, the City may authorize placement of a lien on the real estate to be certified to the Delaware County Auditor in the amount assessed together with interest thereon from the date of such certification at the then existing rate for payment of judgments in the State of Ohio. Such interest shall continue on an annualized basis until paid. 
E.  Any owner or benefiting party aggrieved by an action(s) of the Director under this section may take an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the date service of notice of such action upon the property owner and/or benefiting party. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.053 - GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA. 
(a)  Acceptable Methods of Calculation. The methods of calculation as listed in Table A shall be used unless otherwise approved by the City . 
(b)  Design Storm. 
(1)  Refer to NOAA's Atlas 14 Point Precipitation Frequency Estimates for rainfall depths for City of Powell. The appropriate "CN" factor may be determined by using Technical Release No. 55 (S.C.S.) or its Ohio Supplement. 
(2)  The Major Storm must be based on a return period of not less than 100 years. A return period of 200 years may be required as directed by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Drainage Area Determination. The drainage area shall be determined from any of the following sources: 
(1)  U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle (7.5 minute series) contour maps, 
(2)  Municipality of Powell-Topographic contour maps; 
(3)  Delaware County Auditor GIS Topographic Information; and/or 
(4)  Actual field investigation. 
(d)  Routing Path. 
(1)  Capacity. The routing path or the major drainage system is that part of the storm drainage system which carries the runoff which exceeds the capacity of the designed drainage facilities. The major drainage system shall have the capacity to carry runoff from a storm with a return period of not less than 100 years without causing significant threat to property or public safety. A return period of 200 years may be required if conditions warrant. 
(2)  Surface routing paths. Generally, it is not economically feasible to size a storm sewer system to collect and convey more than the frequent storm runoff. Essentially, the complete drainage system of an urban area contains two separate drainage elements. While the storm sewers are the primary element, the storm drainageways must be provided for the emergency flow from more intense storms. 
(3)  Intent in providing routing paths. The intent of planning for the major drainage element or emergency flow is to insure that stormwater runoff in excess of the capacity of the primary drainage system has a route to follow which will not cause a major loss of property or any loss of life. It should be remembered that the major drainage system exists even when it is not planned for and whether or not development exists. 
(4)  Street right-of-way paths. Street rights-of-way are a common choice for conveying major drainage flows. Again, such use must be anticipated when the street layout is established. Side and rear lot lines offer one alternative to the street. The problem with this alternative is the possibility of individual property owners encroaching on the major drainage easement. Rarely is the problem recognized until the infrequent rainstorm occurs and the major system fails to operate properly. Where the street is designated as the major drainageway, the depth of flow shall not exceed 12 inches at the gutter line for local and collector streets and shall not exceed the crown for arterial streets. The same maximum depth criteria will apply where a major drainageway crosses the street. Where a major drainageway is located outside a street right-of-way, easements shall be provided. All major storm routing easements shall be shown on the grading and/or drainage plan. Also, include elevation control points at the terminals of elements of the routing paths. These are to be proof surveyed for "as built" conformance. 
(5)  Multi-purpose routing paths. In order to protect the integrity of the non-street drainage rights-of-way, the engineer is encouraged to design routing paths for multi-purpose functions. Pedestrian and bicycle paths lend themselves naturally to this application. Linear parks aligned along the major drainage corridor are also very effective, but usually require greater width than would normally be necessary for drainage purposes. 
(6)  Major storm runoff. The major storm runoff is routed through the drainage system to determine if the combined capacity of the routing path and storm sewer system is sufficient. The capacity of the storm sewer system at any given point is assumed to be the same for the major storm as for the five year storm frequency. That, is storm sewer system will be considered as conveying the flow (Q) of a five year storm, with the remainder of the 100-year flow rate safely conveyed in the emergency storm route known as the "Routing Path." Submit calculations showing conveyance of the Routing Path with details of critical segments such as near building structures. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.054 - SPECIFIC DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS. 
(a)  Roadway Culverts. 
(1)  General specifications. The size and shape of the culvert should be such that it will carry a predetermined design peak discharge without the depth of water at the entrance or the velocity at the outlet exceeding allowable limits. 
(2)  Design procedure. The culvert design procedure recommended for use is as required in the Ohio Department of Transportation Location and Design Manual (current edition). 
(3)  Preferred construction. Single span culverts, including concrete box and slab top are preferred. Multiple cell pipe culverts, when they are the only structures that will meet the physical requirements introduced by rigid headwater controls, will be acceptable. 
(4)  Drainage area. The drainage area in acres, and headwater elevation and the estimated runoff or design discharge in cubic feet per second, and the storm frequency in years shall be shown on the plan for each culvert. 
(5)  Inlet elevation. The flowline elevation at the culvert inlet should be set deep enough to provide an adequate outlet for future storm sewer improvements upstream. 
(6)  Design storm frequency (roadway culverts). The minimum frequency used shall be as guided by the Ohio Department of Transportation Location and Design Manual, or as directed by the City Engineer on a case by case basis. 
(7)  Design flow. For method of calculation, refer to Table A. 
(8)  Maximum allowable headwater. The maximum allowable headwater shall not exceed or cause any of the following: 
A.  Eighteen inches below the top of curb; 
B.  Twelve inches below the edge of pavement; 
C.  One-half times the diameter of culvert; or 
D.  Diameter or rise plus two feet, in deep ravines. 
(9)  Manning's roughness coefficient (n). (See Table B) Manning's Roughness Coefficient (n) shall be as given in Table B unless an alternate value is approved by the City Engineer. 
(10)  Entrance loss coefficient (Ke). (See Table B) The Entrance Loss Coefficient (Ke) shall be as given in Table B based upon the headwall configuration unless an alternative value is approved by the City Engineer. 
(11)  Minimum cover to subgrade. Nine inches from top of pipe to bottom of subgrade shall be minimum cover. 
(12)  Maximum allowable outlet velocity. 
Earthen Channel 2.5 f.p.s. Turf Channel 5 f.p.s. Rock Protection Per ODOT L&D Manual  
Notes: 
A.  When the outlet velocity exceeds 18 f.p.s., a stilling basin must be used. 
B.  The downstream channel must have the ability to handle the flow satisfactorily. 
(13)  Structural design criteria. The structural design criteria for culverts will be the same as that required by the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT). 
(14)  Emergency flow routing. Also show how emergency flow passes the structure. Additional scour protection may be needed for this. 
(b)  Storm Sewers. The more important criteria to consider in designing storm sewer systems are listed below. 
(1)  The sewer must be deep enough to receive the flow from all of its sources within the watershed. 
(2)  The size of the storm sewer must be adequate for flowing full based on the design storm. If the sewer is designed for surcharging, explain and justify. 
(3)  All storm sewer systems are to be designed using the Manning's equation: 
V =   1.49r ? s 1/2     n  
Q = AV 
where:   Q = Rate of discharge (c.f.s.) 
A = Area of cross-section of flow (sq.ft.) 
V = Mean velocity of flow (f.p.s.) 
n = Manning's roughness coefficient 
r = A/wp = Hydraulic radius (ft.) 
s = Slope of channel or hydraulic grade line if surcharged (ft./ft.) 
wp = Wetted perimeter (ft.) 
(4)  The storm sewer material shall be concrete or approved plastics. 
(5)  The flowline of the storm sewer pipes should be set so that the crown of the pipes, at the junctions, are at the same elevation. However, the crown of the outlet pipe may be lower. 
(6)  Minimum design storm frequency for public storm sewers shall be designed to a five year storm flowing full capacity. Minimum design storm frequency for private storm sewers shall be a two year flowing full capacity. 
(7)  Hydraulic gradient for public storm sewers shall be based on a ten year storm and a five year storm for private storm sewers. The hydraulic gradient shall not exceed the window or grate elevation for an inlet or catch basin. Grade line shall be based on the tailwater or eight-tenths of the diameter at the outlet or other critical points within the system. 
(8)  Design flow. 
For method of calculation, refer to Table A. 
Minimum time of concentration: 
Curb Inlet 10 minutes Ditch C.B. 15 minutes  
(9)  Minimum diameter of storm sewer pipe: 10 inches. 
(10)  Manning's roughness coefficient (n). 
For all storm sewers: n = 0.012 
(11)  Minimum cover to subgrade: 
Reinforced or 
Extra Strength Pipe 
(Top of pipe to Bottom of Subgrade)   
 9 inches Standard Strength Pipe 
(Beyond pavement and 
paved shoulders)   
 18 inches  
(12)  Maximum cover. The support strength of the conduit, as installed, must be in accordance with current ODOT specifications. The design procedure recommended for use in structural design of storm sewers is found in Concrete Pipe Design Manual, prepared by American Concrete Pipe Association, 1501 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia 22209. 
(13)  Maximum length between access structures. 
Pipes under 60 inches 300 Feet  Pipes 60 inches and over 500 Feet  
(14)  Minimum velocity for design flow. 3 f.p.s. 
(c)  Open Water Courses. Where open water courses are utilized for conveyance of runoff computations will be made and adequate protection be installed to prevent erosion at times of peak flow. The computations shall also insure good flow characteristics at time of low flow. Access to storm drainage ditches and channels shall be by means of maintenance easements. Such maintenance easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width, measured horizontally from the top of the bank, exclusive of the width of the ditch, or channel, and a maintenance easement of this type shall be provided on each side of a flood control or storm drainage ditch channel or similar type facility. Maintenance easements are to be kept free of obstructions. A request for an exemption must be in writing at the time of submission of "preliminary engineering plan". Additionally, per Section 1147.16(g) of Powell City Code streams and riparian corridors may be further protected by a Stream Corridor Protection Zone. 
(1)  Minimum design storm frequency (open watercourses). 
Ten year storm   0.8 full depth when man-made watercourse 
             bank full depth when natural watercourse 
(2)  Design flow. For method of calculation, refer to Table A. 
(3)  Allowable velocities in new ditches. For allowable velocities, refer to "Erosion and Sediment Control" requirements of these Standards. 
(4)  Allowable velocities in existing channels. The channel must have the ability to handle the flow satisfactorily. 
(5)  Manning's roughness coefficient (n) (open watercourses). 
Sod or jute mat lining: 0.05 Paved lining: 0.015 Rock protection: 0.08 Existing channel: varies Downstream from the 
Development Area: 0.25  
(6)  Minimum slope. 
For New Channels: 
(Desirable) 0.40% (Absolute) 0.24% with a minimum velocity of 2 f.p.s.  
(7)  Side slopes (desirable): 1:4-One foot vertical for each four feet of horizontal width. 
(d)  Curb Inlet. 
(1)  General. The satisfactory removal of surface water from curbed pavement is as important as any other phase of stormwater control. The spread of water on the pavement for the design storm is considered as the best control for pavement drainage. The design procedure recommended for use is Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 12, available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office. On combined runs of over 600 feet contributing to a snag curve, an additional inlet may be required near the low point, plus or minus two-tenths foot above the inlet at the sag. 
(2)  Design storm (curb inlets). The following shall be used: 
A.  Two year storm frequency. 
B.  Rational method of calculation. 
C.  Ten minutes for minimum time of concentration. 
D.  0.015 for roughness coefficient. 
E.  Maximum width of spread of flow: 
Street Width Width of Spread < 26 ft.   8 ft. > 26 ft.   9 ft.  
(e)  Detention Facilities. 
(1)  General. The location, construction, ownership and maintenance of the detention or retention facility, whether public or private, shall be resolved prior to recording the final subdivision plat and the acceptance of the "final engineering and construction plan." No lot sales will be permitted until this is done. 
(2)  Types of facilities. In development and developing urban and suburban areas, several means for controlling stormwater runoff could be used. This usually involves storing runoff on or below the ground surface. The following types of storage facilities are suggested for detention: 
A.  Parking lot storage. Parking lot storage is surface storage where shallow ponding is designing to flood specifically graded areas of the parking lot. Controlled release features are incorporated into the surface drainage system of the parking lot. Parking lot storage is a convenient multi-use structural control method where impervious parking lots are planned. Design features include small ponding areas with slotted controlled release structures and/or pipe-size reduction, and increased curb heights. This method can easily be incorporated into a site development at approximately the same cost as that of a conventional parking lot. The major disadvantage is the inconvenience to users during the ponding function. This inconvenience can be minimized with proper design consideration. Clogging of the flow control device and icy conditions during cold weather are maintenance problems. Parking lot design and construction grades are critical factors. For these reasons, the functional effectiveness of parking lot storage is questionable. This method is intended to control the runoff directly from the parking area, and is usually not appropriate for storing large runoff volumes. 
B.  Dry basins or detention basins. Dry basins are surface storage areas created by constructing a typical excavated or embankment basin. There is no normal pool level and a specific controlled release feature is included to control the rate of discharge. The detention flow control structure is usually a multi-stage device, and the retention flow control structure is usually a single-stage device. Dry basins are the most widely used structural method of stormwater management. The soil permeability and water storage potential are not as important with dry basins as with wet basins; therefore, dry basins have the greatest potential for broad applications. They can be utilized in small developments because they can be designed and constructed as small structures. 
Dry basins are often less costly than wet ponds because they do not require extensive design and construction considerations. They can be designed for multi-use purposes such as recreation and parks. 
C.  Wet ponds or basins. Wet basins. 
(3)  Design criteria. 
A.  Acceptable methods of calculation. 
1.  See Table A. 
2.  Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System - Part III.G.2.e. or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit and/or OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System- Part III.G.2.g, or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit. 
3.  Whichever acceptable method results in a larger detention volume shall prevail. 
B.  Release rates. 
1.  Under post development conditions the peak rate of runoff from a 100 year frequency, 24 [hour] storm shall not be greater than the peak runoff rate from a one-year frequency, 24-hour storm. 
2.  Release rates as defined for post construction stormwater management Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System- Part III.G.2.e, or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit and/or OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System-Part III.G.2.g, or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit. 
C.  Specifications. 
1.  The surface of a detention area should be constructed with sufficient slopes (minimum of: 2% - grassed surfaces, 1% - paved surfaces, and 0.5% - paved channels) to drain properly so that all the runoff is removed following a storm. 
2.  A ditch(es) shall be paved and constructed from the pipe(s) outletting into the basin, to the outlet structure. 
3.  Seeding and other erosion control methods will be used to protect all slopes: sod, jute matting, rock protection or concrete. 
4.  The side slopes for a detention facility shall be no steeper than 4:1 (horizontal or vertical). 
D.  Debris-control structures. Debris-control structures may be required in some of the detention methods and should be considered as an essential part of the design. The procedure recommended for use is Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 9, available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C. For dams and levies over ten feet in height, refer to O.R.C.  1521.062. 
E.  Proof surveys. Proof Surveys when required shall be performed by the Developer, Contractor, or other entity constructing the stormwater drainage facilities, or order to demonstrate conclusively that the facilities are constructed to the elevations, slopes, grades, and sizes shown on the reviewed plans on file with the Municipality. Such surveys shall be conducted by a registered Professional Surveyor, shall employ standard survey techniques, and shall produce original field notes which shall be furnished to the City for review and record purposes. Reduction of notes, and any plotting necessary to make the notes interpretable, shall be by the surveyor performing separate from, other construction surveys which may be conducted by the City or its agents. All discrepancies revealed in the as-construction facilities by the proof survey shall be rectified by the Developer, Contractor, or other entity constructing the stormwater drainage facilities, and the proof survey re-performed, in order to demonstrate conformance. 
F.  Access and maintenance easements. Specific, dedicated easement rights shall be required, in order to provide for the necessary maintenance of all stormwater facilities. Generally, a maintenance easement of 20 foot minimum width, in addition to the size of the stormwater facility when flooded, is required. A specifically located, 20 foot minimum width access easement shall also be required, from the easement at, alongside, or around the stormwater facility, to the nearest public right-of-way. Maintenance responsibilities will be determined and so stated in the easement. The 20 minimum outside the flooded facility must be on a slope of 10:1 maximum. 
(f)  Post Construction Best Management Practices. 
(1)  General. Developments disturbing land in excess of 1 acre are required to follow Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System- Part III.G.2.e, or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit and/or OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System- Part III.G.2.g, or any pertinent section of subsequent issuances of this permit for best management practices in providing for post construction run off. 
(2)  Acceptable post construction best management practices. Although the Ohio EPA Permit Numbers OHC000003 and OHCO00001 provides several best management practices that are acceptable to the State, the City Engineer shall determine whether certain of these practices are acceptable in relation to the site and type of development proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
TABLE A
ACCEPTABLE METHODS OF CALCULATION 
DRAINAGE AREA (ACRES) STORMWATER QUANTITY PEAK 
DISCHARGE ONLY PEAK DISCHARGE and 
TOTAL RUNOFF VOLUME STORAGE VOLUME HOMOGEN. LAND USE NON-HOMOGEN. HOMOGEN. NON-HOMOGEN. LESS THAN 200 RATIONAL OR PEAK DISCHARGE PEAK DISCHARGE (*) 
TABULAR HYDRO-GRAPH GRAPHICAL (*) STORAGE INDICATION 200 TO 640 PEAK DISCHARGE GREATER THAN 640 (*) 
TABULAR HYDROGRAPH (*) 
STORAGE INDICATION  
* Note: The "Tabular Hydrograph" and "Storage-indication" methods are preferred and are normally used to check drainage calculations submitted to the City Engineer. 
Method References: 
Rational: (Q=CIA), 
Graphical: Ibid. , Pg. 143 
Storage-Indication: Ibid. , Pg. 143 
Peak Discharge: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil 
  Conservation Service, Urban Hydrology for Small 
   Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 , 1986 
Tabular Hydrography: Ibid. , Chap. 5 
TABLE B
DESIGN COEFFICIENTS FOR ROADWAY CULVERTS 
TYPE STRUCTURE MANNING'S ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENT (N) ENTRANCE LOSS COEFFICIENT (Ke)* CONCRETE PIPE 0.013 0.2 BOX 0.013 0.2 TO 0.5 SLAB TOP 0.03 TO 0.05 0.2 TO 0.5 CORRUGATED METAL 0.021 0.2 TO 0.9  
* As a function of the headwall configuration 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.06 - SEEDING AND MULCHING. 
    All ditches, right-of-way areas, disturbed during construction are to be seeded and mulched. The specifications in Table C on the following page, developed in cooperation with the Soil Conservation Service, outline the minimum requirements that shall be followed for both the rate of application and the time table for seeding. 
(a)  Anchor mulch with liquid asphalt (RC 70, 250, 800), apply at four hundredths gallon per square yard or 200 gallons per acre. 
(b)  Emulsified asphalt-Rapid setting (RS 1 or RS 2), apply at three hundredths gallon per square yard or 160 gallons per acre. 
(c)  Mulch nettings-Jute, cotton or plastic nettings stapled to soil surface according to manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Seeding shall be made within two days after final grading or following seedbed preparation with a disk or other suitable equipment. On sloping land, the final operation shall be done on the contour. 
(e)  Mulch shall be applied immediately after seeding and spread evenly over the entire seeding area. 
(f)  Seed shall be applied uniformly with a cyclone seeder, drill, cultipacker seeder or hydro-seeder. 
TABLE C
SPECIFICATIONS FOR SEEDING AND MULCHING 
SEED TYPE (8) SEEDING DATES PER 1000 SQ. FT. PER ACRE TALL FESCUE   
  
March 1 
  
to 
  
September 15 2 Pounds 80 Pounds TALL Annual 
 Ryegrass 1/2 Pounds 20 Pounds Small 
 grain 
 straw 
 mulch 100 Pounds 
2 to 3 Bales 2 Tons or 
50 Bales Fertilizer 25 Pounds of 
12-12-12 or the 
equivalent 1000 Pounds of 
12-12-12 or the equivalent Temporary Seeding Rye or Wheat September 15 
to October 30 3 Pounds 2 Bushels Soil Protection Small 
 Grain 
 Straw 
 Mulch October 30 
to 
March 1 2 to 3 Bales 2 Tons  
* Other mixtures may be considered by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-26-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.07 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. 
(a)  Requirements. No person shall cause or allow earth-disturbing activities on a development area except in compliance with the standards and criteria set out in subsection (c) hereof and the applicable subsection (a)(1) or (2) hereof: 
(1)  When a proposed development area consists of one or more acres and earth-disturbing activities are proposed for the whole area or any part thereof, the responsible person shall develop and submit for approval a sediment control plan prior to any earth-disturbing activity. Such a plan must contain sediment pollution control practices so that compliance with other provisions of this chapter will be achieved during and after development. Such a plan shall include specific requirements established by the approving agency and be filled with approving agency. 
(2)  When a proposed development area involves less than one acre, it is not necessary to submit a sediment control plan; however, the responsible person must comply with the other provisions of this chapter. All earth- disturbing activities shall be subject to surveillance and site investigation by the approving agency to determine compliance with the standards and regulations. 
(b)  Exceptions. No sediment control plan shall be required for public road, highway, other transportation, or drainage improvement, or maintenance thereof, undertaken by a government agency or entity if such agency or entity plans to follow a statement of sediment control policy which has been submitted by the sponsoring agency or entity and approved by the approving agency. 
(c)  Standards and Criteria During and Through the End of Construction. In order to control sediment pollution of water resources the owner or person responsible for the development area shall use conservation planning and practices to maintain the level of conservation established by the following standards: 
(1)  Timing of sediment-trapping practices. Sediment control practices shall be functional throughout earth-disturbing activity. Settling facilities, perimeter controls, and other practices intended to trap sediment shall be implemented as the first step of grading including the start of clearing and grubbing. They shall continue to function until the upslope development area is restabilized. 
(2)  Stabilization of denuded areas. Denuded areas shall have temporary and permanent soil stabilization applied according to the following tables: 
Area Requiring Temporary
Stabilization Time Frame to Apply Temporary
Stabilization Any disturbed areas within 50 feet of a stream and not a final grade Within two days of the most recent disturbance if the area will remain idle for more than 21 days For all construction activities, any disturbed areas that will be dormant for more than 21 days but less than one year and not within 50 feet of a stream Within seven days of the most recent disturbance in the area Disturbed areas that will be idle over winter Prior to the onset of winter weather  
Area Requiring Permanent
Stabilization Time Frame to Apply Permanent
Stabilization Any areas that will lie dormant for one year or more Within seven days of the most recent disturbance in the area  
Area Requiring Permanent
Stabilization Time Frame to Apply Permanent
Stabilization Any areas within 50 feet of a stream and at final grade Within 2 days of reaching final grade Any other areas at final grade Within seven days of reaching final grade within that area  
Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization techniques must be employed. 
(3)  Settling facilities. Concentrated stormwater runoff from denuded areas shall pass through a sediment-settling facility. 
The facility's storage capacity shall be sixty-seven cubic yards per acre of drainage area. 
(4)  Sediment barriers. 
A.  Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas shall be filtered or diverted to a settling facility. 
B.  Sediment barriers such as sediment fence or diversions to settling facilities shall protect adjacent properties and water resources from sediment transported by sheet flow. 
(5)  Storm sewer inlet protection. All storm sewer inlets which accept water runoff from the development area shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the storm sewer system without first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment. 
(6)  Working in or crossing streams. 
A.  Streams including bed and banks shall be restabilized immediately after in-channel work is completed, interrupted, or stopped. 
To the extent practicable, construction vehicles shall be kept out of streams. Where in-channel work is necessary, precautions shall be taken to stabilize the work area during construction to minimize erosion. 
B.  If a live (wet) stream must be crossed by construction vehicles regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided. 
(7)  Construction access routes. Measures shall be taken to prevent soil transport onto surfaces where runoff is not checked by sediment controls, or onto public roads. 
(8)  Sloughing and dumping. 
A.  No soil, rock, debris, or any other material shall be dumped or placed into a water resource or into such proximity that it may readily slough, slip, or erode into a water resource unless such dumping or placing is authorized by the approving agency, and when applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, for such purposes as, but not limited to, constructing bridges, culverts, mitigating wetlands, and erosion control structures. 
B.  Unstable soils prone to slipping or landsliding shall not be graded, excavated, filled or have load imposed upon them unless the work is done in accordance with a qualified professional engineer's recommendation to correct, eliminate, or adequately address the problems. 
(9)  Cut and fill slopes. Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will minimize erosion. Consideration shall be given to the length and steepness of the slopes, soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater conditions, and slope stabilization. 
(10)  Stabilization of outfalls and channels. Outfalls and constructed or modified channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a post-development, ten-year frequency storm to minimize erosion. 
(11)  Establishment of permanent vegetation. A permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until ground cover is achieved which, in the opinion of the approving agency, provides adequate cover and is mature enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive adverse weather conditions. 
(12)  Disposition of temporary practices. All temporary erosion and sediment control practices shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the temporary practices are no longer needed, unless otherwise authorized by the approving agency. Trapped sediment shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion. 
(13)  Maintenance. All temporary erosion and sediment control practices shall be designed and constructed to minimize maintenance requirements. They shall be maintained and repaired as needed to assure continued performance of their intended function. 
(d)  Additional Requirements. 
(1)  The standards are general guidelines and shall not limit the right of the approving agency to impose additional, more stringent requirements, nor shall the standards limit the right of the approving agency to waive individual requirements. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control practices used to satisfy standards shall meet the specifications in the current edition of Water Management and Sediment Control For Urbanizing Areas (Soil Conservation Service, Ohio). 
(3)  Erosion and sediment control practices used shall satisfy the requirements set forth in Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and/or. OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or subsequent issuances of these permits. 
(e)  Post-construction Storm Water Management Requirements. Post-construction storm water quality management design shall satisfy the requirements set forth in Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and/or. OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or subsequent issuances of these permits. 
(f)  Stream Channel and Flood Plain Erosion. 
(1)  To control pollution of public waters by soil sediment from accelerated stream channel erosion and to control flood plain erosion caused by accelerated stormwater runoff from development areas, the increased peak rates and volumes of runoff shall be controlled such that: 
A.  The peak rate of runoff from the 100-year storm (unless the City Engineer requires more stringent criteria) and all more frequent storms occurring on the development area does not exceed the peak rate of runoff from a one-year frequency, 24 hour storm occurring on the same area under predevelopment conditions. 
B.  The peak rate of runoff for the water quality volume shall not exceed those release rates calculated as part of the Ohio EPA Permit Number OHC000003-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and/or. OHCO00001-Authorization for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity Located Within Portions of the Olentangy River Watershed Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or subsequent issuances of these permits. 
(2)  Methods for controlling increases in stormwater runoff peaks and volumes may include but are not limited to: 
A.  Retarding flow velocities by increasing friction; for example, grassed road ditches rather than paved street gutters where practical (low density development areas, access roads, etc.); discharging roof water to vegetated areas; or grass and rock lined drainage channels: 
B.  Grading and construction of terraces and diversions to slow runoff and use of grade control structures to provide a level of control in flow paths and stream gradients; 
C.  Induced infiltration of increased stormwater runoff into the soil where practical; for example, constructing special infiltration areas where soils are suitable; retaining topsoil for all areas to be revegetated; or providing good infiltration areas with proper emergency overflow facilities; and, 
D.  Provisions for detention and retention; for example, permanent ponds and lakes with stormwater basins provided with proper drainage, multiple use areas for stormwater detention and recreation, wildlife, transportation, fire protection, aesthetics, or subsurface storage areas. 
(g)  Administration. 
(1)  Plan review. The approving agency shall within 90 days of receipt of a sediment control plan, indicate its approval or disapproval to the person who filed the plan. Indication of disapproval shall include the plan deficiencies and the procedures for filing a revised plan. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, earth-disturbing activities shall proceed only in accordance with conditions outlined by the approving agency. 
(2)  Inspection to ensure compliance. The Municipality or its representative may inspect development areas to determine compliance with these regulations. If it is determined that a violation of these regulations exists, the responsible person will be notified of the deficiencies or noncompliance. After a reasonable time for voluntary compliance, the inspector or inspecting agency shall report that deficiency or noncompliance to the Municipality. The Municipality upon determination that a person is not complying with these regulations may issue, an order to cease all construction activity until the development is in compliance. The order shall describe the problem and the work needed, and specify a date whereby the work must be completed. 
(3)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other action or inaction in relation to this regulation may appeal to the court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made within 20 days of the date of an order or decision and shall specify the grounds for appeal. 
(4)  Maintenance. The Municipality shall assume overriding responsibility for permanent maintenance of structures and other facilities designed to control erosion and manage stormwater runoff when the benefiting area involves two or more property owners unless otherwise determined by agreement. The Municipality may require structures and facilities to be designed to reduce maintenance costs and/or allow individual or group property owners' maintenance, with ultimate responsibilities remaining with the Municipality. 
(h)  Penalties for Violations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a minor misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense, and in addition pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(i)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter certain rules or word usage apply to the text as follows: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(2)  The term shall is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word may is permissive. 
(3)  The word or term not interpreted or defined by this article shall be used with a meaning of common or standard utilization, so as to give this ordinance it most responsible application. 
(4)  Approving agency means the governing body of the Municipality or its duly designated representative. 
(5)  Channel means a natural stream that conveys water; a ditch or channel excavated for the flow of water. 
(6)  Development area means any contiguous (abutting) area owned by one person or operated as one development unit and used or being developed for non-farm commercial, industrial, residential, or other non-farm purposes upon which earth-disturbing activities are planned or underway. 
(7)  District means a soil and water conservation district, organized under Chapter 1515 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(8)  Ditch means an excavation either dug or natural for the purpose of drainage or irrigation with intermittent flow. 
(9)  Drainageway means an area of concentrated water flow other than a river, stream, ditch, or grassed waterway. 
(10)  Dumping means grading, pushing, piling, throwing, unloading, or placing. 
(11)  Earth-disturbing activity means any grading, excavating, filling or other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or man-made ground cover is destroyed and which may result in or contribute to erosion and sediment pollution. 
(12)  Earth material means soil, sediment, rock, sand, gravel, and organic material or residue associated with or attached to the soil. 
(13)  Erosion means: 
A.  The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep. 
B.  Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
C.  Erosion includes: 
1.  Accelerated erosion: Erosion much more rapid than normal, natural or geologic erosion, primarily as a result of the influence of the activities or man. 
2.  Floodplain erosion: Abrading and wearing away of the nearly level land situated on either side of the channel due to overflow flooding. 
3.  Gully erosion: The erosion process whereby water accumulates in narrow channels during and immediately after rainfall or snow or ice melt and actively removes the soil from this narrow area to considerable depths such that the channel would not be obliterated by normal smoothing or tillage operations. 
4.  Natural erosion (geologic erosion): Wearing away of the earth's surface by water, ice or other natural environmental conditions of climate, vegetation, etc., undisturbed by man. 
5.  Normal erosion: The gradual erosion of land used by man which does not greatly exceed natural erosion. 
6.  Rill erosion: An erosion process in which numerous small channels only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently disturbed soils. 
7.  Sheet erosion: The removal of a fairly uniform layer of soil from the land surface by wind or runoff water. 
(14)  Grassed waterway means a broad or shallow natural course or constructed channel covered with erosion-resistant grasses or similar vegetative cover and used to conduct surface water. 
(15)  Landslide means the rapid downward and outward movement of large rock material and/or soil mass under the influence of gravity in which the movement of the soil mass occurs along an interior surface of sliding. 
(16)  Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the federal government, or any combination thereof. 
(17)  Sediment means solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, gravity, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface above or below sea level. 
(18)  Sediment basin means a barrier, dam, or other suitable detention facility built across an area of waterflow to settle and retain sediment carried by the runoff waters. 
(19)  Sediment control plan means a written description, acceptable to the approving agency, of methods for controlling sediment pollution from accelerated erosion on a development area of five or more contiguous acres or from erosion caused by accelerated runoff from a development area of five or more contiguous acres. 
(20)  Sediment pollution means failure to use management or conservation practices to abate wind or water erosion of the soil or to abate the degradation of the waters of the state by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading excavating, filling or other soil-disturbing activities on land used or being developed for non-farm commercial, industrial, residential, or other non-farm purposes. 
(21)  Slip means landslide as defined above. 
(22)  Sloughing means a slip or downward movement of an extended layer of soil resulting from the undermining action of water or the earth-disturbing activity of man. 
(23)  Soil loss means soil relocated on or removed from a given site by the forces of erosion and the redeposit of the soil at another site on land or in a body of water. 
(24)  Stabilization means such practices as temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, matting, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, phasing of construction operations, use of construction entrances and the use of alternative ground cover. 
(25)  Storm frequency means the average period of time within which a storm of a given duration and intensity can be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
(26)  Stream means a body of water running or flowing on the earth's surface or channel in which such flow occurs. Flow may be seasonally intermittent. 
(27)  Topsoil means surface and upper surface soils which presumably are darker colored, fertile soil materials, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 3-15-2011) 
APPENDIX A:
TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES FOR FLOWING WATER 
TABLE D
MAXIMUM VELOCITIES FOR GRASSED WATERWAYS 
Slope Permissible Velocity* COVER Range** 
(percent) Erosion Resistant 
Soil (Ft. Per. Sec) Easily Eroded Soil 
(Ft. Per. Sec) Kentucky Bluegrass 0-5 7 5   Tall Fescue 5-10 6 4   Smooth Brome over-10 5 3 Grass Mixtures** 0-5 5 4   Reed canary 5-10 6 3   Redtop*** 
  Red Fescue 0-5 3.5 2.5  
*  Use velocities exceeding five feet per second only where good cover and proper maintenance can be obtained. 
**  Do not use slopes steeper than ten percent except for vegetated side slopes in combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center section. 
***  Do not use on slopes steeper than five percent except for vegetated side slopes in combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center section. 
DRAINAGE FIELD DITCHES 
Drainage field ditches are shallow graded ditches with flat side slopes which do not interfere with tillage operations. Generally, the side slopes range from 8:1 to 15:1. The purpose of drainage field ditches is to collect water from depressional or nearly flat areas within a field and remove it to a stable outlet. 
Generally, erosive velocities will not be a problem because of the low gradient of fields in which drainage field ditches are used and because of the shallow side slopes. Maximum velocities shall be limited to 2.5 feet/second unless on-site studies show that higher velocities will not result in erosive conditions. 
MAXIMUM VELOCITIES FOR VEGETATED CHANNELS 
Drainage Areas Less Than One Square Mile: 
The maximum permissible design velocity shall be based on site conditions and shall be such as to result in stability of the ditch bottoms and side slopes. Maximum permissible velocities will be computed using bank-full stage of ten-year frequency stage whichever is lower. The following table will be used as maximum velocity for all drainage main or lateral designs. Vegetation will be established immediately after construction. 
SUBSOIL TEXTURE MAXIMUM VELOCITY* 
(Ft. Per. Sec.) Sand and sandy loam (non colloidal) 2.5 Silt loam (also high lime clay) 3.0 Sandy clay loam 3.5 Clay loam 4.0 Stiff clay, fine gravel and graded loam to gravels 5.0 Graded silt to cobbles (colloidal) 5.5 Shale, hardpan, coarse gravel 6.0  
Drainage Areas Greater Than One Square Mile: 
Channel velocities for newly constructed channels with drainage area in excess of one square mile shall meet special stability requirements contained in U.S. Soil Conservation Service Technical Guide (Technical Release 25, Planning and Design of Open Channels). 
* Channels that cannot be designed to meet the maximum velocity limitation must be stabilized with materials other than vegetation. Such materials include crushed rock, concrete, gabions, etc. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.08 - NATURAL RESERVE. 
    There shall be preserved a natural area at least 120 feet wide along both sides of all streams designated as a state scenic river. This area shall be measured horizontally, perpendicular to the river, from the point on the river bank where the terrestrial and aquatic vegetation meet. No structures or improvement shall be permitted in the natural area except for those associated with storm drainage systems and underground utilities. Damaged or diseased trees or those in imminent danger of being uprooted or falling in or along the stream may be removed. The stump and root structure of trees on the stream bank shall be left in place to retard bank erosion. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.09 - SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. 
    Sanitary sewerage systems shall meet the requirements of the Delaware County Sanitary Sewer District. All Sanitary Sewer Designs shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to final submission to the Sewer District. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.10 - WATER SYSTEM. 
(a)  The water lines and appurtenances shall meet the requirements of the DelCo Water Company. 
(b)  The minimum size water line serving one fire hydrant shall be six inch diameter. When two or more fire hydrants will draw water through the same waterline the minimum diameter shall be eight inches. Fire hydrants shall be spaced so that any point of an inhabited building can be reached by using less than 500 feet of fire hose from two fire hydrants. All fire hydrants shall conform to and be installed in accordance with the Municipality of Powell Standard Drawings. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992) 
1111.11 - MONUMENTS, LOT PINS. 
(a)  (1)  Monuments shall be placed at each change of direction of a subdivision or development boundary, at the point of intersection of the centerlines of all streets, at the beginning and ending of each street centerline curve, and at the center of each cul-de-sac. 
(2)  Monuments in the street centerlines shall be placed upon the completion of paving. Monuments outside of the street pavement shall be placed or their existence verified upon the completion of work in the immediate area of the monument's location. Monuments on the street centerline shall be railroad spikes not less than six inches long or one inch by 30 inches solid iron bars with the exact point marked with a center punch or "X". Then tops of monuments on the street centerline shall be set at least one-quarter inch below the pavement surface. Monuments outside the paved area shall be one-half inch by 36 inch iron bar. 
(b)  Prior to conditional acceptance of public improvements, all lot corners, all lot line angle points, and the beginning and ending points of curves in all lot lines shall be marked by the use of hubs or pins with witness stakes or reference points in the pavement, curb or other features. A plan showing the references shall be filed with the City Engineer when referencing is used. 
(c)  After the completion of site grading and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any lot, iron pins shall be set or their existence verified at all lot corners, at all lot line angle points, and at the beginning and ending of curves in all lot lines. Iron pins shall be one-half inch by 36 inch solid iron bars driven flush with the ground. If the point to be marked falls in a blacktop drive, a railroad spike not less than six inches long may be used. If the point to be marked falls in a concrete drive, a P.K. nail may be set. 
(d)  All monuments and lot pins or references shall be set by a surveyor who is registered in the State of Ohio. All pins shall have a cap identifying the surveyor and registration number. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1111.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00 per offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 92-21, 6-16-1992) 
CHAPTER 1113 - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENTS[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Minimum design standards, Ch. 1111 

1113.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for constructing sanitary sewers, waterlines, pavements, storm sewers and other site improvements within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1113.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in this chapter unless the context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1113.03 - REFERENCE SPECIFICATIONS. 
    All work shall be performed in accordance with the standards for materials, workmanship and procedures established in the latest edition of the specifications and standard drawings adopted in Table 107-I hereof, except as such standards are added to or modified herein, or in the approved Construction Plans and Contract Documents. The reference to sections or items of the specifications in Table 107-I, shall include all work covered by that section or item. Therefore, the reference to Section 200, EARTHWORK of the ODOTS, also refers to ITEM 201, Clearing and Grubbing, or ITEM 203, Roadway Excavation and Embankment, as well as 203.13, Subgrade. 
(a)  Where used in this chapter, the abbreviations set forth in the left hand column immediately below stand for the published standards or governmental units described immediately to the right of the abbreviation. 
(1) DCSD = Delaware County Sewer District (2) DCWC = DelCo Water Company (3) POWELL = City of Powell (4) ODOT = State of Ohio Department of Transportation (5) ODOTS = State of Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material Specifications (6) COC = City of Columbus Construction and Material Specifications  
(b)  Table 107-I REFERENCE STANDARDS. 
Type of Work Reference 
Specifications Standard 
Construction 
Drawings Earthwork Section "200 EARTHWORK," ODOTS ODOT OR COC Roadway Bases Section "300 BASES," ODOTS ODOT OR COC Roadway Pavement Section "400 FLEXIBLE PAVEMENT" & Section "450 RIGID PAVEMENT" ODOTS ODOT OR COC Structures Section "500 STRUCTURES," ODOTS ODOT OR COC Incidentals 
(See Note # 1) Section "600 INCIDENTALS," ODOTS ODOT OR COC Roadside & Unpaved Areas Section "650 ROADSIDE," ODOTS ODOT OR COC Waterline System DELCO DELCO Sanitary Sewer System DCRSD DCRSD  
NOTE 1. All work and material pertaining to sanitary sewer construction shall be governed by the Delaware County Sanitary District, unless modified by the approved Construction Plans and documents. 
(c)  The following are modifications to the reference specification of Table 107-I. 
(1)  Sidewalks: ODOTS 608.03(c) is changed by deleting the next to last sentence that pertains to construction joints around manholes, etc. The last sentence is changed to read: "Premolded expansion joint material 1/2 inch thick shall be installed to the full depth and across the full width of the walk at intervals of thirty feet (30') minimum, when the sidewalk thickness changes such as at driveway entrances, and between the walk and any fixed structures or object such as buildings, manholes, curbing, sign posts, existing sidewalks or structures, or utility poles." ODOTS 608.03(d) is changed to read: "transverse slope of ? inch per foot." 
(2)  Curbing: The requirement for joint sealer in ODOTS 609.04(a) is deleted. ODOTS 609.04(f) is added as follows: "When mountable curb is not used, curb drops for driveways shall be constructed at the same time curbing or curb and gutter is constructed. When the curbing is in place at the time driveway drops are required, such curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced in five-foot increments, as required to install the driveways." 
(3)  Item 609.05, ODOTS is deleted. 
(4)  Storm Sewer System: The materials permitted shall be governed by those identified in the general notes or detail sheets of the approved construction plans and/or contract documents. 
(5)  When seeding and mulching is performed using the hydro seeding method, the contractor shall insure that there will be sufficient moisture during the seed germination period and 30 days thereafter to support the growth of a healthy stand of grass. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987; Ord. 88-19, 8-24-1988; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1113.04 - STREET LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS. 
    The developer shall install a street lighting system as described herein: 
(a)  Street lights shall be installed with electrical material and equipment so that each is ready for service and in conformity with City Standard Construction Drawings. 
(b)  Unless otherwise shown on the Standard Construction Drawings or modified by these specifications, all material and workmanship shall conform to Item 625, ODOTS. 
(c)  The developer for the particular area under development shall obtain all permits required by the American Electric Power Company. 
(d)  Prior to acceptance and following the installation of the electric and gas lines excluding the service entrances or lines, the Contractor shall operate, the lighting system, including automatic control equipment and other apparatus, from sunset to sunrise for ten consecutive days without interruption or failure. If a cable is broken or damaged the cable shall be repaired and the burn test resumed for the remainder of the test period of five days whichever is longer. If a lamp or a ballast should fail during any of the burn test period, it shall be immediately replaced and the ten day burn test shall be required to be restarted. 
(e)  All electric lines leading to the light poles shall be underground, unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer in previously developed areas. Except as described below, all underground cable shall be installed in PVC plastic conduit meeting the requirements of Item 725.05 ODOTS, sized in accordance with the National Electric Code requirements. Unless approved by the engineer, the energy lines shall be one continuous cable between poles. When a connection is approved in the underground cable, this connection shall be installed in a plastic pull box meeting the requirements of 713.08 ODTS. 
(f)  All cable shall meet the requirements of Item 625.17 and 725.02 ODOTS, as modified herein. All cable shall be #6 AWG stranded copper wire with 600 volt insulation. The insulation for all cable, except the cable in the aluminum pole, shall be suitable for direct burial. 
(g)  All cable runs in excess of 200 feet shall have a three percent voltage drop derating factor applied. No cable runs shall be smaller than #6 AWG copper conductors, and all cable shall be for direct burial. 
(h)  Unless otherwise shown, trenches shall conform to Item 625.13 ODOTS. Plastic tape marked "electric wire" or "electric cable" shall be laid one foot above the conduit during the trench backfill operation. 
(i)  A PVC, schedule 80 conduit sleeve sized in accordance with the requirements of the National Electric Code shall be installed under all public roadways, and existing driveway and sidewalks in excess of five feet in width. 
(j)  All cable lighting structures and appurtenances shall be located within a public right-of-way or easement. The design of the system will be coordinated with the American Electric Power Company. 
(k)  All connections shall meet the requirements of Item 625.18 and 725.15 ODOTS as modified herein. In light pole bases, provide fused, quick disconnect Y connector kits and unfused, quick disconnect Y connector kits as required. 
(l)  No street shall be accepted before the street lighting system has been completely installed, tested and is ready for use. 
(m)  All street lighting design shall be approved by the American Electric Power Company. Two drawings of the "as-built" street lighting layout shall be presented to the American Electric Power Company for record purposes. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 88-19, 8-24-1988; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1113.05 - STREET CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. 
    In addition to the requirements of Table 107-I, street construction shall be in accordance with the following: 
(a)  With the exception of that portion which is under and behind the curbs, the subgrade shall be shaped and compacted after the placement of curbs, sewers and underdrains. 
(b)  Before any base course is laid, the contractor shall stockpile granular material, or agree to use base material, and have the necessary equipment available to repair areas of failed subgrade. All areas of subgrade failure, as determined by the City, shall have the failed material removed at least six inches deep and replaced with clean granular material, compacted granular material or the base course material. Areas of minor rutting shall be shaped to grade and rolled prior to placing the base material. 
(c)  Regardless of the type of pavement section being used, all residential streets, except as provided below, shall have: 
(1)  Five inches of 61/2 bay mix concrete base with sawed joints, or 
(2)  Six inches of 51/2 bay mix concrete base with sawed joints, or 
(3)  Eight and one-half inches of asphaltic base, or 
(4)  Twenty percent thicker stone base than is required for a local residential street, or 
(5)  When concrete pavement is used without any base material, seven inches of concrete surface course. 
(d)  The additional thickness as stated above are not required for any residential street which: 
(1)  Is a cul-de-sac, or 
(2)  Is less than 1,000 feet long, or 
(3)  Does not serve as an outlet or collector for more than 20 lots. 
(e)  No reduction of the surface course or intermediate course shall be allowed because of the increased thickness of the base course. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-03, 3-17-1987) 
1113.06 - CONSTRUCTION TRAFFIC. 
    Construction traffic shall be confined within a development as described herein and routed through the City as directed by the City Engineer. During the construction of, and prior to the final acceptance of streets which are to become public, construction traffic shall be controlled as follows: 
(a)  The trucks used to deliver base and surface paving materials shall be routed to minimize the length of travel on the prepared and accepted subgrade and base material, respectively. 
(b)  All traffic shall stay off the concrete base for seven days, the asphaltic base for two days, the asphaltic surface course for two days, and the concrete surface course for 14 days after placement. After this time the base course and surface courses can be used for construction traffic. 
(c)  The developer shall post signs at entry points of a major development, directing construction traffic in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-28. 7-1-1986) 
1113.07 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  No downspouts, surface inlets, foundation drains, subsurface drains or any other source of ground or surface water shall be connected, either directly or indirectly, to or discharge into any part of the sanitary sewage system. Such drains, inlets and downspouts shall be so constructed as to drain or be pumped into the street, gutter, ditch or storm sewers. 
(b)  Where utilities are under or within five feet of proposed streets, roads or drives, the trench backfill shall be compacted granular material to within six inches of the proposed finished grade or to the subgrade in accordance with Item 310 ODOTS. 
(c)  All utilities shall be installed under existing paved streets by boring or jacking, unless open cutting is specifically approved by the City Engineer. 
(d)  All streets and storm sewers shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1113.08 - CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT. 
    All construction layout shall be performed by an engineer or surveyor, registered in the State of Ohio, at no cost to the City. Cut sheets shall be prepared for all sewers and waterlines following the format established by the City. At least one copy of all cut sheets shall be delivered to the City Engineer two working days prior to beginning any work. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
1113.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for herein shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City of Powell for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986) 
CHAPTER 1115 - INSPECTION GUARANTEES AND ACCEPTANCE[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Engineer to approve plats; inspection of streets and acceptance, O.R.C.  711.08, 711.09; Plat approval, O.R.C.  711.09 

1115.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the City inspection and acceptance procedures for any public improvements that will become the responsibility of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of Chapter 1103 shall be used in this chapter unless the context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.03 - INSPECTION AND RECORDING SITE IMPROVEMENTS. 
    The materials, equipment and procedures used for the construction of all site improvements and public improvements, including but not necessarily limited to streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, and the portion of the sanitary sewers and waterlines which lay within the public right-of-way, will be observed and tested. The location of the public improvements shall be entered into the records of the City by the City Engineer. The cost of such field observation, testing and recording shall be paid by the developer or owner. The estimated cost of this shall be deposited with the City at, or prior to, the pre-construction meeting prior to the beginning of construction. Upon written application by the depositor to the City Engineer within six months from the date of completion of the site improvements as evidenced by a Certificate of Occupancy or the date of final acceptance of the public improvements as required by Section 1115.07, whichever occurs later, all unused monies so deposited shall be refunded to the depositor. If the depositor fails to make such written application for refund, the excess funds so deposited shall be forfeited to the City and credited to the General Fund. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, 6-3-2008) 
1115.04 - CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE. 
    The developer or owner shall guarantee construction, as required in Section 1105.10(g) for the public improvements that will become the responsibility of the City, as required by the Delaware County Sewer District for public sanitary sewers and as required by Del-Co Water Company for the waterlines. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.05 - CONDITIONAL ACCEPTANCE. 
    Upon substantial completion of the construction as shown on the approved construction plans and documents as required by Section 1109, and at the written request by the developer or owner to the City Engineer, the City may grant conditional acceptance, by adopted resolution of City Council, of the public construction that will become the responsibility of the City. This acceptance shall be conditioned upon: 
(a)  The posting of a maintenance guarantee as required in Section 1115.06; 
(b)  The submission of a mylar set computer files, with format as required by the City Engineer, or "as-built" drawings of all public improvements that will become the responsibility of the City; 
(c)  All major components of the public construction of the development being completed to the extent that does not present undue health, safety and welfare hazards to the citizens; 
(d)  A guarantee being made that is satisfactory to the City Engineer and Law Director for the completion of the unfinished work. This guarantee is in addition to the maintenance guarantee as identified in Section 1115.05(a); 
(e)  The City shall not issue any zoning certificates for building construction related to the development of the public improvements until such time as the conditional acceptance resolution required by this section is adopted by City Council. The City may issue zoning certificates for building construction related to the development following the adoption of the conditional acceptance resolution by City Council as required by this section; 
(f)  The developer or owner shall complete, within one year from the date of approval of the conditional acceptance resolution by City Council, all unfinished work and deficient items as identified within the City Engineer's punch list at the time of conditional acceptance. Prior to the end of this one-year period, the developer or owner shall request, in writing to the City Engineer, a formal inspection of the improvements to ensure that all unfinished work and deficient items have been completed by the end of the one-year period. Shall the developer or owner fail to meet this requirement, the City may not issue additional zoning certificates for building construction and the City may impose a fee as approved by City Council in the official fee schedule. The City may also utilize the maintenance guarantee to complete any portion of the unfinished work or City Engineer's punch list of deficient items. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.06 - MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR IMPROVEMENTS; BOND. 
(a)  The developer or owner shall guarantee all public improvements for a period of at least two years from the date such improvements receive conditional acceptance by the City as required by Section 1115.05, plus the time it takes to correct all defects and deficiencies found during the two year period. This guarantee shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, any and all defects and deficiencies in workmanship, materials, and damage caused by others. The cost of all labor, materials, equipment and other incidentals required to maintain, repair and replace any or all of such improvements and to maintain them in good and proper condition, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer during the two year guarantee period shall be assumed by such developer or owner. In the event the developer or owner fails to make such maintenance, repairs or replacements prior to the expiration of the minimum two year maintenance period, or in the event of an emergency which may endanger life or property, the City may make or cause to be made, such repairs or replacement at the expense of such developer or owner. In order to indemnify the City for the expense of any such repairs or replacements made by or at the direction of the City, a maintenance guarantee shall be made by filing with the City evidence satisfactory to the City Engineer and Law Director of one of the following: 
(1)  A maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost, as approved by the City Engineer, for the public improvements, the maintenance bond shall not expire until such time as the public improvements receive final acceptance by adoption of an ordinance by the City Council as required by Section 1115.07. 
(2)  A certified check equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost as approved by the City Engineer for public improvements, or 
(3)  Subject to the approval of the Law Director, a certificate of deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit made out to the City, equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost as approved by the City Engineer of the public improvements. The certificate of deposit or letter of credit shall not expire until such time as the public improvements receive final acceptance by adoption of an ordinance by the city council as required by Section 1115.07. 
(b)  At the written request of the developer or owner to the City Engineer, the maintenance guarantee will be released upon final acceptance of the improvements by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.07 - FINAL ACCEPTANCE. 
    The developer or owner shall request, in writing to the City Engineer, final acceptance and release of the maintenance guarantee. Final acceptance and release of the maintenance guarantee shall be given after all the public improvements have been satisfactorily maintained, all defects or deficiencies have been corrected and all expenses incurred by the City pursuant to the development have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
1115.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for herein shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City of Powell for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 5-4-2005) 
TITLE THREE - ZONING ADMINISTRATION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Unless otherwise indicated at the end of a section, Ordinance 91-01, passed February 5, 1991, composed Title Three and Five of this Part Eleven - Planning and Zoning Code. 

CHAPTER 1121 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Appeals, Ch. 1127 
State Law reference- Zoning of annexed areas, O.R.C.  303.25, 519.18; Appeals, O.R.C.  713.11; Ch. 2506; 

1121.01 - TITLE. 
    Title Three and Five of this Part Eleven-Planning and Zoning Code shall be known and may be cited to as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Municipality of Powell," except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Ordinance." 
1121.02 - PURPOSE. 
    This Zoning Ordinance is enacted for the general purpose of promoting the public health, safety, comfort, and welfare of the residents of Powell; to assure the orderly development of the Municipality; to conserve and protect the natural and scenic resources of the community; to protect and promote those environmental qualities that contribute to the enhancement of community life; to protect the property rights of all individuals by assuring the compatibility of uses and practices within districts; to facilitate the provision of public utilities, public services, recreational and scenic areas, and integrated pedestrian and equestrian path systems; to lessen congestion on public streets, roads, and highways; to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, including the provision of penalties for its violation; and for any other purpose provided in the Zoning Ordinance, the Ohio Revised Code, or under common law rulings. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.025 - INTENT. 
    The Zoning Ordinance shall be applied in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance is to guide development, along with other City policies and provisions, to achieve the vision of the City's Comprehensive Plan. The Zoning Ordinance shall be applied in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance is to be utilized as one of many ways to achieve the vision of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.03 - ZONING CODE. 
    The Municipality of Powell shall prepare bound copies of the Zoning Ordinance, which shall be known as "The Powell Zoning Code," and shall make such copies available for purchase by the public at cost. 
    A digital version of the code will be made available on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.04 - ZONING MAP. 
    A map of the zoning districts of Powell, noted thereon as to adoption and certification by the Council as an integral part of this Ordinance, is hereby incorporated by reference as a part of the Zoning Ordinance. This map shall be known as "The Official Zoning Map of Powell, Ohio." 
1121.05 - INCLUSION OF ZONING MAP IN ZONING CODE. 
    The Powell Zoning Code shall contain a copy of the Zoning Map in each book or online. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.06 - INCLUSION OF AMENDMENTS IN ZONING CODE. 
    The Powell Zoning Code shall contain, as an appendix, all of the amendments made to the text of the Zoning Ordinance, as well as those made to the Zoning Map, following initial adoption of the Zoning Ordinance. 
1121.07 - PERIODIC RECODIFICATION OF AMENDMENTS. 
    At least once every five years, a recodified version of the Zoning Code shall be produced that integrates amendments to text and map that have been made to that date into the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.08 - OPEN MEETING COMPLIANCE. 
    It is found and determined that all formal actions concerning and relating to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance were adopted in open meetings, and that all deliberations that resulted in such formal action were in meetings open to the public, in compliance with all legal requirements, including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
1121.085 - POSTING OF NOTICE SIGN. 
    At least ten days prior to a public hearing or public meeting about land development proposals including but not limited to, Appeals, Variances, Conditional Use Permits, Sketch Plan reviews, Development Plan reviews, Administrative Reviews, Certificate of Appropriateness, the applicant shall post a sign, as designed by the Zoning Administrator but provided by the applicant, that gives notice to the public with regard that a proposal is being reviewed by the city, and provides a city telephone number and web site in order to get information about the current proposal. Such sign shall remain posted until the project is finished with its public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1121.09 - INTERPRETATION. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
1121.10 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Should any section or provision of the Zoning Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
1121.11 - REPEAL. 
    This Zoning Ordinance may be repealed only by complying with the requirements of Section 713 of the Ohio Revised Code and the Municipal Charter. 
1121.12 - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. 
    Ordinances No. 84-85, 87-11, and 88-27, as well as all other Ordinances relative to the Zoning of Powell, and all other Ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give the Zoning Ordinance full force and effect. However, all suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from violation of any Zoning Ordinance or part thereof heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of the State of Ohio or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of any amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if amendments to the Zoning Ordinance had not been adopted; and any and all violations of existing Ordinances, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in the Zoning Ordinance shall be construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted. 
1121.13 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    This Zoning Ordinance shall become effective 30 days after the date of its approval and adoption or as otherwise provided for by law. 
CHAPTER 1123 - DEFINITIONS[10] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- General Code definitions,  101.02; Subdivision definitions, Ch. 1103 

1123.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(1)  Interpretation of Terms or Words: For the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
B.  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
C.  The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement. 
D.  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
E.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
(2)  Accessory use (or structure): Accessory use means a use, object, or structure constructed or installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel, which is located on the same lot as a principal use, object, or structure, and which is subordinate to or serves the principal use, object, or structure, is subordinate in area to the principal use, object, or structure, and is customarily incidental to the principal use, object, or structure. Among other things, "Accessory Use" includes anything of a subordinate nature attached to or detached from a principal structure or use, such as fences, walls, sheds, garages, parking places, decks, and pools. Except as otherwise required in the Zoning Ordinance an accessory use shall be a permitted use. 
(3)  Agriculture: The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, orchards, plant nurseries, natural environment reserves, nature trails and walks, equestrian stables and trails, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce, provided, however that: 
A.  The operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities; and 
B.  The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals or poultry in penned enclosures within 100 feet of any residential zoning district. Agriculture does not include the feeding of garbage to animals or the operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feedyard. 
(4)  Airport: Any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking-off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangers and other necessary buildings, and open spaces. 
(5)  Alley: See "Thoroughfare." 
(6)  Alterations, structural: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
(7)  Automotive repair: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles. 
(8)  Automotive, mobile home, travel trailer, and farm implement sales: The sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers, or farm implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty repair of same, to be displayed and sold on the premises. 
(9)  Automotive wrecking: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles, mobile homes, trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts. 
(10)  Basement: A story all or partly underground but having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. See "Story." 
(11)  Building: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property. 
(12)  Building, accessory: A subordinate building detached from, but located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or use. 
(13)  Building, height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambled roofs. 
(14)  Building line: See "Setback Line." 
(15)  Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building in situated. 
(16)  Business, convenience: Commercial establishments which cater to and can be located in close proximity to or within residential districts without creating undue vehicular congestion, excessive noise, or other objectionable influences. To prevent congestion, convenience uses include, but need not be limited to, drugstores, beauty salons, barber shops, carry-outs, dry cleaning and laundry pickup facilities, and grocery stores, if less than 10,000 square feet in floor area. Uses in this classification tend to serve a day-to-day need in the neighborhood. 
(17)  Business, general: Commercial uses which generally require locations on or near major thoroughfares and/or their intersections, and which tend, in addition to serving day-to-day needs of the community, to also supply the more durable and permanent needs of the whole community. General business uses include, but need not be limited to, such activities as supermarkets; stores that sell hardware, apparel, footwear, appliances, and furniture; department stores; and discount stores. 
(18)  Business, highway: Commercial uses which generally require locations on or near major thoroughfares and/or their intersections, and which tend to serve the motoring public. Highway business uses include, but need not be limited to, such activities as filling stations; truck and auto sales and service; restaurants and motels; and commercial recreation. 
(19)  Business, mobile: A mobile business is a business that utilizes a vehicle such as a truck or trailer, to prepare and/or show merchandise for sale. Typically, a mobile business locates at one location for a very temporary time, such as only for a few hours, and is available to leave and re-locate to another location in a short period of time. 
(20)  Business, office type: Quasi-commercial uses which may often be transitional between retail business and/or manufacturing, and residential uses. Office business generally accommodates professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, and drafting. Institutional offices of a charitable, philanthropic, or religious or educational nature are also included in this classification. 
(21)  Business, services: Any profit making activity which renders services primarily to other commercial or industrial enterprises, or which services and repairs appliances and machines used in homes or businesses. 
(22)  Business, wholesale: Business establishments that generally sell commodities in large quantities or by the piece to retailers, jobbers, other wholesale establishments, or manufacturing establishments. These commodities are basically for further resale, for use in the fabrication of a product, or for use by a business service. 
(23)  Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human or animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
(24)  Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
(25)  Child day-care: Administering to the needs of infants, toddlers, pre-school children, and school children outside of school hours by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption for any part of the 24 hour day in a place or residence other than the child's own home. The following are child day-care facilities: 
A.  Child day-care center: Any place in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation, for 13 or more children at any one time, or any place that is not the permanent residence of the licensee or administrator in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation, for seven to 12 children at any one time. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children under six years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee and who are on the premises shall be counted. 
B.  Type A family day-care home: A permanent residence of the administrator in which child day-care is provided for four to 12 children at any one time, if four or more children are under two years of age. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children under six years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee and who are on the premises of the Type A home shall be counted. The term "Type A family day-care home" does not include a residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all such children are siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is their home. 
C.  Type B family day-care home: A permanent residence of the provider in which child day-care or child day-care services are provided for one to six children at one time and in which no more than three children may be under two years of age at any one time. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children under six years of age who are related to the provider and are on the premises of the Type B home shall be counted. The term "Type B family day-care home" does not include a residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all such children are siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is their home. 
(26)  Clinic: See "Medical Clinic." 
(27)  Cluster housing: Two or more single family detached housing units that are located close to one another and are arranged on a condominium lot in such a manner as to share a single access drive. 
(28)  Club: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a person or persons for a social, literary, political, educational, or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests. 
(29)  Commercial entertainment facilities: Any profit making activity which is generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion picture theaters, carnivals, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and similar entertainment activities. 
(30)  Common wall housing: See "Dwelling, Single family, Attached." 
(31)  Comprehensive plan: See "Municipal Comprehensive Plan. 
(32)  Conditional use: A use permitted within a district other than a principally permitted use, requiring a conditional use permit and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(33)  Conditional use permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator upon approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals to allow a use other than a principally permitted use to be established within the district. 
(34)  Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are individually owned but the structure, common areas and facilities are owned on a proportional, undivided basis by all to the owners. 
(35)  Condominium lot: A lot with joint ownership of common areas. 
(36)  Congregate/assistive living housing: A residential facility for four or more elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments, medical services, and counseling. "Congregate Housing" includes convalescent homes and nursing homes for the aged, and homes for the aged. 
(37)  Convalescent home: A nursing care facility for the housing and care of the mentally well, but physically infirm. 
(38)  Corner lot: See "Lot Types." 
(39)  Cul-de-sac: See "Thoroughfare." 
(40)  Dead-end street: See "Thoroughfare." 
(41)  Density: A unit of measurement expressing the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
A.  Gross Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of the total land to be developed. 
B.  Net Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses. 
(42)  Density Bonus: An increase in the number of allowable dwelling units per acre granted for some specific reason, such as the provision of lower-income housing, as provided for in the zoning regulations. 
(43)  Diligently: Marked by a persevering, uninterrupted, continuous, painstaking effort. 
(44)  District: A part, zone, or geographic area within the municipality (township, county) within which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
(45)  Dwelling: Any building or structure, except a house trailer or mobile home as defined by O.R.C.  4501.01 which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by one or more human occupants. 
(46)  Dwelling unit: Space, within a dwelling, comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees. 
(47)  Dwelling, single-family, attached: A building containing two or more dwelling units, each of which has primarily ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. 
(48)  Dwelling, single-family, detached: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space. 
(49)  Dwelling, two family: A dwelling consisting of two dwelling units which are attached side by side, each unit having a separate entrance. 
(50)  Dwelling, multi-family: A dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling units including condominiums with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls. Multi-family housing may include public housing and industrialized units. 
(51)  Dwelling, industrialized unit: An assembly of materials or products comprising all or part of a total structure which, when constructed, is self-sufficient or substantially self-sufficient and when installed, constitutes a dwelling unit, except for necessary preparations for its placement, and including a modular or sectional unit but not a mobile home. 
(52)  Dwelling, rooming house (boarding house, lodging house, dormitory): A dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation, for three or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in the individual rooms. 
(53)  Easement: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
(54)  Elderly household: Not more than three persons, related or unrelated, who occupy a single dwelling unit, of whom at least one such person is an "elderly person" as defined below. 
(55)  Elderly housing unit: A dwelling unit containing its own sleeping room(s), cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, wherein occupancy is restricted to elderly households. 
(56)  Elderly housing facility: A building or buildings containing 12 or more elderly housing units, each with its own sleeping room(s), cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities, where occupancy is restricted to elderly persons or households. Such facilities may include emergency first aid care, day care, therapy, personal care, nursing facilities, recreational facilities, and provide for independent or semi-independent living. For the purposes of this definition, "elderly housing facility" shall not include convalescent homes, nursing homes, or homes for the aged. 
(57)  Elderly or senior person: Any person who is 55 years of age or older, or any person under 55 years of age who is handicapped such that his physical impairments are of a long-term duration and impede his ability to live independently without a suitable housing environment. 
(58)  Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground gas, electrical, steam or water transmission, or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems or sites, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, traffic signals, hydrants, or other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith which are reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
(59)  Factory-built housing: Factory-built housing means an off-site manufactured or prefabricated or factory-built structure designed for long-term residential use, the components of which are essentially constructed or assembled prior to its delivery to and installation upon a site. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, "factory-built housing" shall include "Manufactured Homes," "Modular Homes," "Mobile Homes," "Prefabricated Homes," and "Sectional Homes." 
(60)  Family: A person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a rooming house, motel or hotel, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, provided, however, that "family" shall not include more than four persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption, except for Class I Type B group residential facilities. 
(61)  Farm: See "Agriculture." 
(62)  Farm sign: A sign denoting the name and address of the farm premises; a sign denoting agricultural produce or products available for sale on the premises; or a sign denoting membership in agricultural organizations. 
(63)  Farm vacation enterprises (profit or non-profit): Farms adapted for use as vacation farms, picnicking and sport areas, fishing waters, camping, scenery, and nature recreation areas; hunting areas; hunting preserves and watershed projects. 
(64)  Feedlot: A relatively small, confined land area for fattening or temporarily holding cattle for shipment. 
(65)  Flood plain: That land, including the flood fringe and the floodway, subject to inundation by the regional flood. 
(66)  Flood, regional: Large floods which have previously occurred or which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like characteristics. The regional flood generally has an average frequency of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. 
(67)  Floodway: That portion of the flood plain, including the channel, which is reasonably required to convey the regional flood waters. Floods of less frequent recurrence are usually contained completely within the floodway. 
(68)  Floodway fringe: That portion of the flood plain, excluding the floodway, where development may be allowed under certain restrictions. 
(69)  Floor area of a residential building: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a residential building, excluding basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, garages, and open porches, but including the area of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between interior faces of walls. 
(70)  Floor area of a non-residential building (to be used in calculating parking requirements): The floor area of the specified use excluding stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts, maintenance shafts and rooms, storage spaces, display windows, and fitting rooms, and similar areas. 
(71)  Floor area, usable: Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
(72)  Food Truck: See "Business, mobile." 
(73)  Food processing: The preparation, storage, or processing of food products. Examples of these activities include bakeries, dairies, canneries, and other similar businesses. 
(74)  Garages, private: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles, travel trailers and/or boats of the occupants of the premises wherein: 
A.  Not more than one space is rented for parking to persons not resident on the premises; 
B.  No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit is parked or stored; 
C.  The commercial vehicle permitted does not exceed two tons capacity. 
(75)  Garage, public: A principal or accessory building other than a private garage, used for parking or temporary storage of passenger automobiles, and in which no service shall be provided for compensation. 
(76)  Garage, service station: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made: 
A.  Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors parts; 
B.  Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; 
C.  Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and blades, grease containers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like; 
D.  Radiator cleaning and flushing; 
E.  Radiator welding and repair; 
F.  Greasing and lubrication; 
G.  Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines; 
H.  Minor servicing and repair of carburetors; 
I.  Adjusting and repairing brakes; 
J.  Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head or crankcase or racing the motor; 
K.  Sales of cold drinks, packaged food, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for service station customers, as accessory and incidental to principle operations; 
L.  Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers, provision of restroom facilities; 
M.  Warranty maintenance and safety inspections. 
Uses permissible at a filling station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operation condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair garage nor a body shop. 
(77)  Group residential facility: A group residential facility is a community residential facility, licensed and/or approved and regulated by the State of Ohio, which provides rehabilitative or habilitative services. There are two classes of group residential facilities: 
A.  Class I: Any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a foster home for children or adults (not including nursing homes) or as a home for the care or rehabilitation of dependent or predelinquent children, for the physically handicapped or disabled, or for those with mental illness or developmental disabilities. A Class I Type A group residential facility contains six or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class I Type B group residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff. 
B.  Class II: Any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a home for juvenile offenders; a halfway house providing residential care or rehabilitation for adult offenders in lieu of institutional sentencing; a halfway house providing residence for persons leaving correctional institutions; and residential rehabilitation centers for alcohol and drug abusers, provided that detoxification is expressly prohibited on such premises. A Class II Type A group residential facility contains at least six or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class II Type B group residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff. 
(78)  Historic district: A district or zone designated by a local authority, state or federal government within which the buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basic and vital importance because of their association with history, or because of their unique architectural style and scale, including materials, proportion, form and architectural detail, or because or their being a part of or related to a square, park, or area the design or general arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan based on cultural, historical or architectural motives or purposes. 
(79)  Home occupation: Home occupation means an accessory use which is an activity, profession, occupation, service, craft, or revenue-enhancing hobby which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and is conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, or elsewhere on the premises by conditional use permit, without any significant adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood. Activities such as teaching, tutoring, babysitting, tax consulting and the like shall involve not more than three receivers of such services at any one time. 
(80)  Hotel or motel and apartment hotel: A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation. As such it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, rooming house, lodging house, or dormitory which is herein separately defined. 
(81)  Institution: Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling, or other correctional services. 
(82)  Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris; whether or not stored, for sale, or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, stored for re-use, baled, disposed, or for other use or disposition. 
(83)  Junk buildings, junk shops, junk yards: Any land, property, structure, building, or combination of the same, on which junk, as defined in the Revised Code, is stored or processed. 
(84)  Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four or more domesticated animals more than four months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, and which offers provisions for minor medical treatment. 
(85)  Landscaping: The treatment of exterior spaces with carefully planned arrangements of ground surface cover, natural greenery, plant materials, organic materials, natural stones, or paving, and elements such as shrubs, trees, fences, and gazebos to enhance the environment. 
(86)  Life-care facility: A facility for the transitional residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living in single family units to congregate apartment living where residents share meals, and culminating in a full health and continuing care nursing home facility. 
(87)  Living area, residential: See "Floor Area of a Residential Building." 
(88)  Loading space, off-street: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. All off-street loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 
(89)  Location map: See "Vicinity Map." 
(90)  Lot: For the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
A.  A single lot of record; 
B.  A portion of a lot of record; 
C.  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record. 
(91)  Lot coverage: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. 
(92)  Lot frontage: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yards" in this section. 
(93)  Lot, minimum area of: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street. 
(94)  Lot measurements: A lot shall be measured as follows: 
A.  Depth: The distance between the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
B.  Width: The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the building setback line. 
(95)  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
(96)  Lot types: Terminology used in this Zoning Ordinance with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through lots is as follows: 
A.  Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
B.  Interior lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street. 
C.  Through lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
D.  Reversed frontage lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot. 
(97)  Major thoroughfare plan: The portion of a comprehensive plan or other transportation related plan associated with the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Municipality indicating the general location and characteristics recommended for arterial, collector, and local streets or thoroughfares. 
(98)  Maintenance and storage facilities: Land, buildings, and structures devoted primarily to the maintenance and storage of construction equipment and material. 
(99)  Manufactured home park: Any lot upon which two or more manufactured homes are located for residential use, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended to be used as a part of the facilities of such park. 
(100)  Manufacturing, heavy: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing, and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive in character; require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation; and normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary. 
(101)  Manufacturing, light: Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet, and free of objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor, or dust; operating and storing within enclosed structures; and generating little industrial traffic and no nuisances. 
(102)  Manufacturing, extractive: Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing of any mineral natural resource. 
(103)  Medical clinic: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, but who are provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises. 
(104)  Mobile home: Any non-self-propelled vehicle so designed, constructed, reconstructed, or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected to utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks, or other temporary foundation and used or so construed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and exceeding a gross weight of 4,500 pounds and an overall length of 30 feet, and not in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(105)  Mobile home park: Any site, or tract of land under single ownership, upon which three or more mobile homes used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes; including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the facilities of such park. 
(106)  Municipal comprehensive plan: A plan with subplans, or any portion thereof, adopted by the Municipality showing the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities and land uses; which may include, but shall not be limited to, housing, industrial and commercial uses, transportation networks, major thoroughfares, parks, schools, and other community facilities. This plan establishes the goals, objectives, and policies of the community. It is also known as the "Policies Plan for the Development of the City of Powell, Ohio" and any subplans designated therein. 
(107)  Nonconformities: Lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures and land in combination lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or its amendments which do no conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which they are situated, and are therefore incompatible. 
(108)  Nursing home: See "Convalescent Home." 
(109)  Nursery, plant materials: Land, building, structure, or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. 
(110)  Open spaces: An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts, any other recreational facilities that the Planning and Zoning Commission deems permissive. Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation, and the like shall not be included. 
(111)  Overlay district: A district described by the zoning map and/or Zoning Ordinance within which, through superimposition of a special designation, furthermore regulations and requirements apply in addition to those of the underlying districts to which such designation is added. 
(112)  Parking space, off-street: For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, an off-street parking space shall consist of an area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 
(113)  Patio home: A building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping unit that provides for family outdoor functions commonly associated with rear yard areas in a private interior courtyard, no less than 900 square feet in area, that is open to the sky and defined by a solid opaque wall where it abuts the exterior of the structure that is no less than six feet high. A patio home may be a detached unit, or it may have a zero-lot-line relationship at one or more sides. 
(114)  Performance bond or surety bond: An agreement by a subdivider or developer with the Municipality for the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider's agreement. 
(115)  Personal services: Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barber shops, beauty parlors, and similar activities. 
(116)  Pet or household pet: An animal kept solely for personal enjoyment as a companion, such as a dog, cat, bird, or small reptile, commonly kept in the home with the occupant. 
(117)  Policies plan: See "Municipal Comprehensive Plan." 
(118)  Professional activities: The use of offices and related spaces for such professional services as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers, architects, and engineers, and similar professions. 
(119)  Public service facility: The erection, construction, alteration, operation, or maintenance of buildings, power plants, or substations, sewage disposal or pumping plants and other similar public service structures by a public utility, by a railroad, whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public water and sewage services. 
(120)  Public uses: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service facilities. 
(121)  Public way: An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk, bicycle path; or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not. 
(122)  Quasipublic use: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals, and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic, or non-profit nature. 
(123)  Recreation camp: An area of land on which two or more travel trailers, campers, tents or other similar temporary recreational structures are regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any building, structure or fixture of equipment that is used or intended to be used in connection with providing such accommodations. 
(124)  Recreation facilities: Public or private facilities that may be classified as either "extensive" or "intensive" depending upon the scope of services offered and the extent of use. Extensive facilities generally require and utilize considerable areas of land and include, but need not be limited to hunting, fishing, and riding clubs and parks. Intensive facilities generally require less land (used more intensively) and include, but need not be limited to, miniature golf courses, amusement parks, stadiums, and bowling alleys. 
(125)  Research activities: Research, development, and testing related to such fields as chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation, and engineering. All research, testing, and development shall be carried on within entirely enclosed buildings, and no noise, smoke, glare, vibration, or odor shall be detected outside of said building. 
(126)  Roadside stand: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural and related products. 
(127)  Right-of-way: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges. 
(128)  Satellite signal receiver: "Dish-type satellite signal-receiving antennas," "earth stations" or "ground stations," whether functioning as part of a basic service system, direct broadcast satellite system, or multipoint distribution service system, shall mean one, or a combination of two or more of the following: 
A.  A signal-receiving device such as a dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communications or signals from earth-orbiting satellites or similar sources. 
B.  A low-noise amplifier (LNA) whose purpose is to boost, magnify, store, transfer or transmit signals. 
C.  A coaxial cable whose purpose is to convey or transmit signals to a receiver. 
(129)  Seat: For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each 24 lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs. 
(130)  Senior person: See "Elderly Person." 
(131)  Setback line: A line established by the zoning ordinance, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building, other than accessory building, or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in said code. See "Yard." 
(132)  Sewers, central or group: An approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and disposal system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community, or region. 
(133)  Sewers, on-site: A sewage treatment installation on an individual lot for the elimination of sewage which provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction. 
(134)  Sidewalk: That portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. 
(135)  Sign: Any visual communication display, object, device, graphic, structure, or part, situated indoors or outdoors, or attached to, painted on, or displayed from a building or structure, in order to direct or attract attention to, or to announce or promote, an object, person, service, product, event, location, organization or the like, by means of letters, words, designs, colors, symbols, fixtures, images or illuminations. 
A.  Sign, on-premises: Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
B.  Sign, off-premises: Any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
C.  Sign, illuminated: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas, or other artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light. 
D.  Sign, lighting device: Any light; string of lights, or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign. 
E.  Sign, projecting: Any sign which projects from the exterior of a building. 
F.  Sign, permanent: A sign erected with the intent on using it for permanent identification of a building, site or use. 
G.  Sign, portable: A sign that is not permanent, including banners, A-frame, stick-type, billboards or air activated attraction devices. 
(136)  Special district: A zoning district created to meet the needs of an area experiencing unusual problems, or one that is designed to meet special needs. 
(137)  Story: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above. See "Basement." 
(138)  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, and billboards. 
(139)  Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development, or lease. 
(140)  Substantial change: A modification or change from the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of any change in use, change in density of ten percent , or change in points of ingress and egress. 
(141)  Supply yards: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods. 
(142)  Swimming pool: A pool, pond, lake, or open tank containing at least one and one-half feet of water at any point and maintained by the owner or manager. 
A.  Private: Exclusively used without paying an additional charge for admission by the residents and guests of a single household, a multifamily development, or a community, the members and guests of a club, or the patrons of a motel or hotel; an accessory use. 
B.  Community: Operated with a charge for admission; a primary use. 
(143)  Temporary construction access: An access drive and/or road which provides for access to a property under construction only during the term of its construction, then is removed when a permanent access drive is created. 
(144)  Thoroughfare, street, or road: The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follow: 
A.  Alley: A minor street used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street. 
B.  Arterial street: A general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volumes of traffic, usually on a continuous route. 
C.  Collector street: A thoroughfare, whether within a residential, industrial, commercial, or other type of development, which primarily carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation routes within residential subdivisions. 
D.  Cul-de-sac: A local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround. 
E.  Dead-end street: A street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future. 
F.  Local street: A street primarily for providing access to residential or other abutting property. 
G.  Loop street: A type of local street, each end of which terminates at an intersection with the same arterial or collector street, and whose principal radius points of the 180 degree system of turns are not more than 1,000 feet from said arterial or collector street, nor normally more than 600 feet from each other. 
H.  Marginal access street: A local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (Also called Frontage Street) 
(145)  Through lot: See "Lot Types." 
(146)  Transportation, director of: The Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation. 
(147)  Use: The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(148)  Variance: A variance is a modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(149)  Veterinary animal hospital or clinic: A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals, and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and/or recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary activity. 
(150)  Vicinity map: A drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in order to better locate and orient the area in question. 
(151)  Walkway: A public way, five feet or more in width, for pedestrian use only, whether along the side of a road or not. 
(152)  Yard: A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from three feet above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
A.  Yard, front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building. 
B.  Yard, rear: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building. 
C.  Yard, side: A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing the front and rear yards. 
(153)  Zero lot line development: An arrangement of housing on adjoining lots in which the required side yard is reduced on one side and increased on the other so that the sum of the offsets on any lot is no less than the sum of the required offsets. No building or structure shall be closer to a lot line than five feet unless it abuts the lot line and is provided with an access easement of five feet on the adjoining lot or abuts a building or structure on the adjoining lot. 
(154)  Zoning administrator: The Zoning Administrator is the person designated by the Mayor to administer and enforce this Zoning and related regulations. 
(155)  Zoning certificate: A document issued by the Zoning Administrator verifying that the planned uses of lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and the characteristics of such uses, comply with the Zoning Ordinance. 
(156)  Zoning, certificate of compliance (or certificate of zoning compliance): A document issued by the Zoning Administrator verifying that work executed complies with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(157)  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): "Municipal Storm Sewer System" or "MS4" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): 
A.  Owned or operated by the City; 
B.  Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; 
C.  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
D.  Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined by Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 122.2 (40 CFR 122.2). 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40; Ord. No. 91-01, 2-5-1991; Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 2004-33, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 86-28, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1125 - NONCONFORMITIES[11] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses; retroactive measures, O.R.C.  713.15 

1125.01 - PURPOSE. 
    Within the districts established by this Zoning Ordinance, or by amendments thereto, lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures and land in combination exist which were lawful before this Zoning Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. The legitimate interest of those who lawfully established these nonconformities are herein recognized by providing for their continuance, subject to regulations limiting their completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension, and substitution. Nevertheless, while it is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that legal nonconformities be allowed to continue until removed, they should not be encouraged to survive. Therefore, no nonconformity may be moved, extended, altered, expanded, or used as grounds for any other use(s) or structure(s) prohibited elsewhere in the district except as otherwise specifically provided for in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1125.02 - USES UNDER CONDITIONAL USE PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES. 
    Any use which is permitted as a conditional use and has been approved in a district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
1125.03 - INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMITIES. 
    Nonconformities are declared by this Zoning Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such uses are located. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be extended, nor shall same be extended or enlarged in ground covering, floor area, or volume after passage of this Zoning Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises announcing such non-conforming use(s), nor by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. 
1125.04 - AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried out diligently. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be "actual construction," provided that the work has been carried out diligently. Where this is the case, the Zoning Administrator may require proof in the form of an affidavit or similar document that the original intended use of the building has not been changed. The ground story framework, including structural parts of a second floor, if planned for, shall have been completed within one year and the entire building completed within two years after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or new zoning and building certificates will be required verifying compliance with the conditions of this Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto. Where work has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance for which no building certificate was issued, although required at the time, or which is in violation of a previously issued certificate, such violations shall stand and shall be prosecuted. Work for which no building certificate has been issued shall be required to comply with this Zoning Ordinance and its amendments. 
1125.05 - CERTIFICATES FOR NONCONFORMING USES. 
    The Zoning Administrator may upon his own initiative, or shall upon the request of any owner, issue a certificate for any lot, structure, use of land, use of structure, or use of land and structure in combination, that certifies that the lot, structure, or use is a valid nonconforming use. The certificate shall specify the reason why the use is a nonconforming use, including a description of the extent and kind of use made of the property in question, the portion of the structure or land used for the nonconforming use, and the extent that dimensional requirements are nonconforming. The purpose of this Section is to protect the owners of lands or structures that are or become nonconforming. One copy of the certificate shall be returned to the owner and one copy shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator, who shall maintain as a public record a file of all such certificates. 
1125.06 - SINGLE NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD. 
    In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Such lot must be an isolated lot, and not of contiguous frontage with other lots that have not been built upon and that are in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Where the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission that these conditions have been met, he may proceed to issue the requisite certificates without referring the matter to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
1125.07 - NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN COMBINATION. 
    If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/or area requirements established by this Zoning Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1125.08 - YARD REDUCTIONS PERMITTED BY DIRECT ACTION OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR FOR NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD. 
    The following yard reductions shall be permitted by direct action of the Zoning Administrator, upon a finding of fact complying with the conditions specified below, and certification of these conditions to the Board of Zoning Appeals, without recourse to variance by action of the Board of Zoning Appeals: 
(a)  Where there are single nonconforming substandard lots of record at the time of the effectiveness of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto that were not self-created conditions and that are located in districts permitting residences, the depth of the required rear yard and/or the minimum side yard width may be reduced by up to four inches for each foot by which the lot of record at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto was less than 100 feet deep and/or less than 50 feet wide, where this is necessary to provide the minimum site for one single car garage on the site, no more than 12 feet in width by 22 feet in length; 
(b)  Where construction or enlargement of, or addition to, a one-family detached dwelling is to be undertaken on a lot that is substandard by virtue of lot area and/or lot width of a single nonconforming substandard lot of record at the time of effectiveness of this Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto located in a district permitting such residences, and application of the yard requirements of the district within which it is located result in a space available for construction that is less than one-half the minimum required floor area (precluding construction of a two-story residence of minimum total floor area), and/or the space available for construction of the residence is less than 22 feet in width, then: 
(1)  The depth of the required rear yard and/or the minimum width of each side yard may be reduced by up to four inches for each foot by which the lot is less than 100 feet deep and/or less than 50 feet in width; and 
(2)  Any combination of such reductions of side and rear yards may be provided to the point where a minimum available ground area of one-half the minimum required floor area and a minimum construction width of 22 feet has been attained but not exceeded. 
(c)  Side yards, when reduced under subsection (b) hereof, shall be reduced uniformly at both sides. Side yards shall only be reduced, under both subsection (a) and (b) above, when rear yard reduction, within the specified limits, cannot result in the required minimum residential ground floor area, or the minimum garage area, and/or where essential to provide the minimum 22 foot residential construction width. Under no condition shall a side yard provided for under the terms of this Section, for either a residence or a garage, be less than five feet in width, or less than ten feet in the case of a side yard along a side street lot line, and provided that no rear yard shall be less than ten feet; 
(d)  Where the full application of the reliefs provided above still do not provide the minimum site specified for a single car garage, the permit for construction of the garage shall be denied; and 
(e)  Where the full application of the reliefs provided above still do not provide a minimum ground floor area of one-half the minimum required floor area and/or a minimum 22 foot construction width, on a lot of record meeting the conditions specified above located in a district in which there is no other possible legal use of the ground without variance, the Zoning Administrator shall so certify to the Board of Zoning Appeals, which will accept such certification as proof of a clear and certain hardship on the land warranting relief. 
1125.09 - NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND. 
    Where, at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Zoning Ordinance, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
(a)  No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance; 
(b)  No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance; 
(c)  If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned for six months or more, except when government action impedes access to the premises, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which such land is located; 
(d)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
1125.10 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, bulk, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. Changes to nonconforming structures shall be oriented toward making the nonconformity more in character with its surroundings; 
(b)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance; 
(c)  Any maintenance, repair, replacement, or restoration activities shall not increase the number or extent of nonconformities; and 
(d)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
1125.11 - NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN COMBINATION. 
    If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Zoning Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(b)  Any nonconforming use may be extended by no more than 50 percent in area but only in parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(c)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(d)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six months or more except when government action impedes access to the premises, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and 
(e)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
1125.12 - TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES. 
(a)  Termination of Use Through Discontinuance. When any nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for six months or more, any new use shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. The intent to continue a nonconforming use shall not be evidence of its continuance. 
(b)  Termination of Use by Damage or Destruction. In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure, exclusive of foundation, it shall not be rebuilt, restored, or reoccupied for any use unless it conforms to all regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. When such a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent or less of the replacement cost, exclusive of foundation, no repairs or rebuilding shall be permitted except in conformity with all applicable regulations of this Zoning Ordinance or its amendments and the following conditions: 
(1)  A Zoning Certificate pertaining to such restoration shall be applied for and issued within 90 days of such destruction, and rebuilding shall be diligently pursued to completion. 
(2)  Such restoration shall not cause a new nonconformity, nor shall it increase the degree of nonconformance or noncompliance existing prior to such damage or destruction. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, "replacement cost" shall be defined as the reproduction cost of the structure, exclusive of foundations, prior to the calamity depreciated in accordance with applicable Internal Revenue Guidelines for the structure. 
1125.13 - REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. 
    On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. Where appropriate, a building permit for such activities shall be required. 
CHAPTER 1127 - APPEALS AND VARIANCES[12] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Board of Zoning Appeals, Sec. 11.02 
State Law reference- Appeals from zoning decisions, O.R.C.  713.11, Ch. 2506; Council may amend zoning, O.R.C.  713.10 

1127.01 - GENERAL. 
    Appeals and variances shall conform to the procedures and requirements of Sections 1127.01-1127.14, inclusive, of this Zoning Ordinance. As specified in Section 147.01, the Board of Zoning Appeals, has appellate jurisdiction relative to appeals and variances. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40) 
1127.02 - INTENT. 
    It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals only on appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law. It is further the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that the duties of the Council relating to this Zoning Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that might arise. The Council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, rezonings, and/or the repeal of this Zoning Ordinance as provided by law, and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges. 
1127.03 - APPEALS. 
(a)  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this Zoning Ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the legislative authority affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days after the decision by filing, with the Zoning Administrator, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is being taken. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
1127.04 - STAY OF PROCEEDINGS. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the application a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, or by a Court of Record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
1127.05 - VARIANCES. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions of the land and/or buildings that are unique to the property in question, and not self-created, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance would result in deprivation of all beneficial use of the land. 
(b)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or reduced or greater profit, and evidence of variances granted under similar conditions elsewhere is irrelevant. 
1127.06 - APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES. 
    All applications for a zoning variance shall be submitted on such forms as designated by the Zoning Administrator. Except as otherwise permitted in this Zoning Ordinance, no variance from the strict application of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be granted unless the Board finds that the written application for the requested variance contains all of the following: 
(a)  Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s) 
(b)  Legal description of the property, including seven copies of the plot plan drawn to the appropriate scale and showing the following: 
(1)  The boundaries and dimensions of the lot; 
(2)  Location of the property with regard to nearby streets and surrounding land uses and buildings on adjacent properties; 
(3)  The size, shape and location of existing and proposed structures on the site; 
(4)  The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures, including accessways, walks, off-street parking, loading spaces, and landscaping; and 
(5)  The relationship of the requested variance to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Description or nature of the variance requested, including the specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance upon which the variance is requested. 
(d)  A fee as established by ordinance. 
(e)  Narrative statements and supporting documentation establishing and substantiating that the variance conforms to each of the following standards: 
(1)  Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property; 
(2)  Whether the variance is substantial; 
(3)  Whether the character of the neighborhood would be adversely affected or whether adjoining properties would suffer an adverse impact as a result of the variance; 
(4)  Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of governmental services (e.g., water, sewer, garbage); 
(5)  Whether the property owner purchased the property with knowledge of the zoning restriction; 
(6)  Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be obviated through some method other than a variance; and 
(7)  Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would be observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance. 
(f)  No single factor shall be considered a determinative factor, and the factors shall be weighed and balanced in determining whether a variance is warranted. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that the criteria for a variance is warranted. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that the criteria for a variance have been met and that the application of the zoning requirement to the applicant's property would be inequitable. 
(g)  Such other information regarding the application as may be pertinent to the request and required by the Zoning Administrator or the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Applications lacking any part of this information shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted upon until completed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1127.07 - ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals may further prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to insure that the objectives of the regulations and provisions to which the variance applies will be met. Any violation of such conditions and safeguards, when they have been made a part of the terms under which the variance has been granted, shall be deemed a punishable violation under this Zoning Ordinance. 
1127.08 - PUBLIC HEARING BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after receipt of a complete application for an appeal or variance from the Zoning Administrator or from an applicant. 
1127.09 - NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. 
    Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 1127.08, notice of such hearing shall be given on the Municipality of Powell website at least 10 days before the date of said hearings. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, and the nature of the proposed appeal or variance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017)) 
1127.10 - NOTICE TO PARTIES IN INTEREST. 
    Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 1127.08, written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals by first class mail, at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all property owners contiguous to, directly across the street from and within 250 feet of the parcel at issue. This notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published on the City website as specified in Section 1127.09. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1127.11 - PROCEDURES FOR HEARING BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    Whenever the Board of Zoning Appeals holds a hearing, a Court Reporter's official record of the hearing shall be made, the session shall be recorded electronically, all witnesses shall be sworn in, and opportunities for cross-examination and rebuttal of witnesses shall be granted. Materials presented in evidence shall be duly recorded, item numbered as exhibits, and shall have "Exhibit No. _____" indelibly recorded on each item. 
1127.12 - RECORDS OF HEARINGS BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
(a)  If an appellant requests a record of a hearing, the Court Reporter's records of each hearing held by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be transcribed into typed pages in three copies: one copy shall be provided to the appellant; one copy shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator, and one copy shall remain on file with the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(b)  The cost of the Court Reporter's services in preparing the record, transcribing and typing the record, and preparing the requisite copies shall be invoiced to and paid by the appellant through a billing transmitted with the copy of the official record of the hearing. 
1127.13 - ACTION BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    Within 30 days after the public hearing required in Section 1127.08, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or disapprove the request for appeal or variance. The Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall further make a written finding, approved as to form by the Director of Law, and processed and filed by the Clerk to the Board of Zoning Appeals, stating the reasons for disapproval, or if approved, that reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, that each of the standards set for the granting of the variance in this Ordinance have been met, and that the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible a reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
1127.14 - FEE TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR A VARIANCE AND FOR APPEALS. 
    The Council shall establish the fee to be deposited with each application for a Variance and for Appeals. Such fees shall be required generally for each application to defray the costs of advertising, mailing, and other expenses. The costs associated with the Records of Hearings as stated in Section 1127.12 shall be in addition to these fees. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40) 
CHAPTER 1129 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS; SIMILAR AND ACCESSORY USES[13] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Amendment, Ch. 1131; Fees, Ch. 1133 

1129.01 - REGULATION OF CONDITIONAL USES. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the location and maintenance of any and all conditional uses. 
1129.02 - CONTENTS OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION. 
    Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a conditional use is proposed shall make an application for a Conditional Use Permit by filing it with the Zoning Administrator, who shall within seven days transmit complete applications to the Board of Zoning Appeals. All applications for a conditional use permit shall be submitted on such forms as designated by the Zoning Administrator. No application shall be considered as complete unless it contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s); 
(b)  Legal description of the property; 
(c)  Zoning district in which the site is located; 
(d)  Description of existing use; 
(e)  Description of proposed conditional use; 
(f)  Seven copies of the plot plan, drawn at an appropriate scale illustrating and denoting the boundaries and dimensions of the lot, the relationship to nearby streets, a plan of the proposed site development for the conditional use showing the location of all buildings, loading areas, streets and traffic accesses, open spaces, refuse and service areas, utilities, signs, yards, landscaping features, walks, off-street parking, the use of land and the location of buildings on adjacent property, and other such information as the Board may require; 
(g)  A narrative statement discussing the compatibility of the proposed use with the existing uses of adjacent properties and with the comprehensive plan, to include an evaluation of the effects on adjoining properties of such elements as traffic circulation, noise, glare, odor, fumes, and vibration; 
(h)  A fee as established by Ordinance; and 
(i)  A narrative addressing each of the criteria contained in Section 1129.03. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1129.03 - GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL CONDITIONAL USES. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals, shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed conditional use and shall approve the application for a Conditional Use Permit only when it has determined that there has been adequate evidence presented to show that such use at the proposed location: 
(a)  Is in fact a conditional use as listed in the Schedule of District Regulations in this Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the site is located; 
(b)  Will be in accord with the general objectives, or with any specific objective, of the comprehensive plan and the Zoning Ordinance; 
(c)  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity, and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area; 
(d)  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses; 
(e)  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services; 
(f)  Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community; 
(g)  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and/or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors; 
(h)  Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares; and 
(i)  Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance. 
1129.04 - SPECIAL CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Child day-care and/or Kindergarten facilities must be architecturally compatible with the neighborhood and provisions must be made for vehicular access, parking, and fences to control accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions, such as roads, streets, lakes, ponds, or adjacent yards. Buildings housing such child day-care and/or kindergarten facilities must be no less than 50 feet from adjoining property lines. 
(b)  Playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas shall be provided with adequate off-street parking areas, water supply, sanitation facilities, fencing to control accessibility of users to hazardous conditions, and any other improvement necessary to protect the users from harm or danger. 
(c)  Cemeteries shall occupy a tract of not less than 100 acres. No building shall be placed closer to the right-of-way line of any road than the setback prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance. No interment shall be made nearer than 50 feet to the right-of-way of the approved public road adjacent thereto. No burial shall be permitted nearer than 25 feet to any other property line unless a mature natural screen has been established along said property line at least six feet in height, in which case burials may be permitted not closer than ten feet to said property line. No mausoleum, crematory, office facility, maintenance building or storage area shall be constructed, except as approved by the Board of Appeals. Parking areas, public accesses, screening and other improvements shall be furnished as required. Existing cemeteries may expand and use existing cemetery land that they own as part of the 100 acre requirement, even if said land does not directly adjoin the existing site. 
(d)  Kennels shall be situated that no building, or outdoor run dedicated to such use shall be located closer than 200 feet to any residence, or lot line in a residential district or residential area of a planned district. 
1129.05 - PUBLIC HEARING BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ON A REQUEST FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after receipt of a complete application for a Conditional Use Permit from the Zoning Administrator. 
1129.06 - NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. 
    Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 1129.05, notice of such hearing shall be given on the Municipality of Powell website at least 10 days before the date of said hearings. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, and shall provide a summary explanation of the conditional use proposed and a description of the site of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1129.07 - NOTICE TO PARTIES OF INTEREST. 
    Prior to conducting the public hearing required in Section 1129.05, written notice of such hearings shall be mailed by the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals by first class mail, at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all parties in interest, to include all property owners listed in the application. The notice shall contain the same information as required in Section 1129.06 for notices published on the City website. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1129.08 - ACTION BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ON A REQUEST FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    Within 30 days after the date of the public hearing required in Section 1129.05, the Board shall take one of the following actions: 
(a)  Approve issuance of the Conditional Use Permit by making an affirmative finding in writing that the proposed conditional use is to be located in a district wherein such use may be conditionally permitted, that all conditions for approval of such use in such district have been met, and that the use will neither result in significant negative impacts upon nor conflict with surrounding uses. Such written findings may also prescribe supplementary conditions and safeguards as specified in Section 1129.09 Upon making an affirmative finding, the Board shall direct the Zoning Administrator to issue a Conditional Use Permit for such use which shall list all conditions and safeguards specified by the Board for approval. 
(b)  Make a written finding that the application is deficient in information, or is in need of modification, and is being returned to the applicant. Such findings shall specify the information and/or modifications which are deemed necessary. 
(c)  Make a written finding that the application is denied, such finding specifying the reason(s) for disapproval. 
    Findings shall be drafted by the Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals, approved as to form by the Director of Law and processed and filed by the Clerk to the Board of Zoning Appeals. If an application is disapproved by the Board, the applicant may seek relief through the Court of Record. 
1129.09 - PROCEDURES FOR HEARING AND RECORDS OF HEARING RELATIVE TO A REQUEST FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    The procedures to be followed by the Board of Zoning Appeals in hearing a request for a Conditional Use Permit, the records to be made, and accommodation of the court reporter's costs shall be identical to those required in Sections 1127.11 and 1127.12 for hearings with regard to variances and appeals. 
1129.10 - SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS. 
    In granting approval for any conditional use, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformance with this Zoning Ordinance. Any violation of such conditions or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the Conditional Use Permit is granted, shall be deemed a punishable violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1129.11 - EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    A Conditional Use Permit shall automatically expire if such conditionally permitted use has not been instituted or utilized within one (1) year of the date on which the permit is issued, or if for any reason whatsoever such use shall cease for six (6) months or more. 
1129.12 - REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals may revoke a Conditional Use Permit for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit. Upon a finding of failure to comply by the Zoning Administrator, and communication of this failure to the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board shall notify the holder of the permit either by certified mail or by direct service by the Zoning Administrator of its intent to revoke the permit and the holder's right to a hearing before the Board within 30 days of receipt of notice if that party requests such a hearing in a certified letter received by the Board within 15 days of the holder's receipt of the Board's notice. If the holder requests a hearing, the Board shall set a time and place for the hearing and notify the holder. At the hearing, the holder may appear in person, be represented by an attorney or other representative, or he may present his position in writing. The procedures and records of such a hearing shall meet all of the requirements specified for such hearings for variance or appeal, as specified in Sections 1127.11 and 1127.12. If no hearing is requested, the Board may revoke the permit without a hearing. The authority to revoke a permit is in addition to any other means of zoning enforcement provided in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1129.13 - FEE TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
    The Council shall establish the fee to be deposited with each application for a Conditional Use Permit. Such fees shall be required generally for each application to defray the costs of advertising, mailing, salaries and other administrative expenses. 
1129.14 - PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS TO DETERMINE THAT A USE IS SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR. 
(a)  Where a specific use is proposed that is not listed or provided for in this Zoning Ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may make a determination, upon appeal from the determination of the Zoning Administrator, that the proposed use is substantially similar to a specific use that is listed or provided for in this Zoning Ordinance. If the Board finds that a use is substantially similar to a specific use listed in this Zoning Ordinance, the substantially similar use is deemed to be a substantially similar permitted use in those districts where the specific use is a permitted use, and a substantially similar conditional use in those districts where the specific use is a conditionally permitted use. 
(b)  In formulating a determination that a proposed use is a substantially similar use, the Board shall follow the procedures relating to appeals and variances as specified in Chapter 1127. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40) 
1129.15 - REMEDY BY APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT. 
    If the Board determines that a proposed use is not substantially similar, remedy may be sought by the appellant through the submission of an application for amendment as prescribed in Chapter 1131. 
1129.16 - STANDARDS FOR CONSIDERATION OF SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USE. 
    The following standards shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals when making a determination that a use is substantially similar to a permitted or a conditional use within a specific district: 
(a)  The compatibility of the proposed use with the general use classification system as specified in this Zoning Ordinance; 
(b)  The nature, predominant characteristics, and intensity of the proposed use in relation to those uses specified by this Zoning Ordinance as being permitted, or in the case of conditional use, conditionally permitted, in that district; and 
(c)  The size, dimensional requirements, parking requirements, traffic generation potential, and other regulatory considerations normally associated with uses as specified in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1129.17 - EFFECT OF DETERMINATION THAT A USE IS SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR. 
    Should a use be determined to be substantially similar to a specific permitted or conditionally permitted use provided for in this Zoning Ordinance, it shall then be permitted in the same manner and under the same conditions and procedures as the use is permitted to which it has been found to be substantially similar. 
1129.18 - RECORD OF SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall maintain as a public record a listing of all uses which have been determined to be substantially similar. For each such use the record shall include the use as listed in the Ordinance, the use unlisted in the Ordinance about which the determination of substantial similarity was made, and the dates of any actions thereupon by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Council. This record shall also contain the same information for all uses which have been determined not to be substantially similar. The Zoning Administrator shall consult this record in the process of issuing future permits. 
1129.19 - REGULATION OF ACCESSORY USES. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses as herein defined. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to regulate accessory uses in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. It is the intent of this section to permit such uses to be established and maintained in a manner which makes them compatible with principal uses and harmonious with uses upon adjacent properties. 
(b)  Definition. "Accessory Use" means a use, object, or structure constructed or installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel, which is located on the same lot as a principal use, object, or structure, and which is subordinate to or serves the principal use, object, or structure, is subordinate in area to the principal use, object, or structure, and is customarily associated with and incidental to the principal use, object, or structure. Among other things, "Accessory Use" includes anything of a subordinate nature attached to or detached from a principal structure or use, such as fences, walls, sheds, garages, parking places, decks, and pools. Except as otherwise regulated or prohibited in this Zoning Ordinance, an accessory use shall be a permitted use. 
(c)  General Requirements. Except as otherwise regulated or prohibited in this Zoning Ordinance, an accessory use or structure shall be permitted in association with a principal use or structure provided that; 
(1)  It shall be 35 percent or less of the gross floor area of the principal use or structure, except where additional space is needed to comply with off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  It shall not contain or be used as a dwelling unit. 
(3)  It shall not exceed 18 feet in height. 
(4)  It shall meet all yard requirements of the principal use, except fences. 
(d)  Dwellings as Accessory Uses. Dwellings may be accessory uses in residential districts if located inside the principal home or if detached as a garage apartment, only if used as a residence by relatives or household servants and no rent is charged. Mobile home trailers shall not be permitted as accessory uses in any district. 
(e)  Accessory Elderly Dwelling Unit. In all districts in which residences are permitted uses, an owner-occupied, single-family dwelling unit may be converted to allow the incorporation of one additional dwelling unit for the exclusive occupancy of an elderly household, a member of which shall be an elderly person related to the owner of the single-family dwelling unit. Such accessory elderly dwelling unit shall be wholly contained within the existing principal building or shall be attached to it by a common wall, floor, or ceiling. The structure shall have at least 2,000 square feet, exclusive of porches, basements or garages, and each of the two dwelling units shall have no less than 1,000 square feet. The application for zoning certificate for such conversion shall be accompanied by an affidavit attesting to the owner's present occupancy of the dwelling unit and to the age and relationship of the elderly person. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40) 
1129.20 - RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES AS ACCESSORY USES. 
    Retail sales and services are permitted as accessory uses when clearly incidental to the principal use. With the exception of restaurants in conjunction with a motel, such uses shall be conducted wholly within the principal building, and without exterior advertising or display. These activities shall be conducted solely for the convenience of the employees, patients, patrons, students, or visitors and not for the general retail public. In hospitals and clinics these accessory uses may include drug stores, florists, gift and book shops, and cafeterias. In institutional settings, office buildings, hotels, country club houses, and airports, such activities may include gift and book shops, restaurants, cafeterias and coffee shops, lounges, pro shops, and beauty and barber shops. 
CHAPTER 1131 - AMENDMENT[14] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Council may amend districting or zoning, O.R.C.  713.10; Zoning regulations notice and hearing, O.R.C.  713.12 

1131.01 - PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENT OR DISTRICT CHANGES. 
    The Zoning Ordinance may be amended utilizing the procedures specified in this chapter. 
1131.02 - GENERAL. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practices require, the Council may, by ordinance, after receipt of recommendation thereon from the Planning and Zoning Commission and subject to procedures and constraints provided by law and in this Ordinance, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries or classification of property. 
1131.03 - INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS. 
    Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in one of the following ways: 
(a)  By the adoption of a motion by the Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(b)  By the adoption of a resolution by the Council; 
(c)  By the filing of an application by at least one owner or lessee of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment. 
1131.04 - CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR ZONING MAP AMENDMENT. 
    An application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map adopted as a part of this Zoning Ordinance by Chapter 1141, undertaken under the terms of Section 1131.03(c), must be complete for consideration. All applications for zoning amendments shall be submitted on such forms as designated by the Zoning Administrator. Applications lacking any part of the information listed below shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on until completed. Applications must contain at least the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant and, in the case of a lessee, of the property owner; 
(b)  Legal description of all of the property affected by the proposed amendment; 
(c)  The proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the Director of Law; 
(d)  A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment in terms of serving the public health, safety, convenience, and/or welfare, and in terms of any changed or changing conditions within the area; 
(e)  The present use; 
(f)  The present zoning district; 
(g)  The proposed use; 
(h)  The proposed zoning district; 
(i)  Five copies of a vicinity map drawn to scale illustrating and denoting: 
(1)  Property lines, ownerships, and property dimensions; 
(2)  Streets, street names, alleys and thoroughfares; 
(3)  Existing zoning district boundaries and designations; 
(4)  Proposed changes to zoning district boundaries and designations; 
(5)  Any other information the Zoning Administrator may require, which may include, but is not limited to: 
A.  Streets and traffic accesses; 
B.  Location and extent of all existing and proposed building and structures; 
C.  Yard dimensions; 
D.  Utilities; 
E.  Landscape features and plans, including the location and trunk diameter of existing trees; 
F.  Site drainage patterns and facilities; 
G.  Drawings and dimensions of signs; 
H.  Refuse and service areas and facilities; 
I.  Open spaces; 
J.  Loading areas; 
K.  Walks and pathways; 
L.  Off-street parking spaces, aisles and accesses; 
M.  Uses of land; 
N.  Location and extent of structures and land uses on surrounding property; and 
O.  Written evidence of compliance with EPA and/or Health Department sanitary sewer requirements. 
(j)  A statement on the ways in which the proposed amendment relates to and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(k)  A fee as established by the Council. 
(l)  Any application for zoning map amendment to a Planned District shall be accompanied by a Development Plan as otherwise described by this Zoning Code. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40; Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.05 - CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT. 
(a)  All applications for zoning amendments shall be submitted on such forms as designated by the Zoning Administrator. Applications for amendments proposing to change, supplement, amend, or repeal any text portion of this Zoning Ordinance must contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant and, of the land owner; 
(2)  The proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the Director of Law; 
(3)  The wording of the current ordinance to be amended; 
(4)  A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment in terms of serving the public health, safety, convenience, and/or welfare, and any changed or changing conditions within the area; 
(5)  A statement explaining the ways in which the proposed amendment relates to and is consistent with the Municipal Comprehensive Plan; and 
(6)  A fee as established by the Council. 
(b)  Applications lacking any part of this information shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted upon until completed. 
1131.06 - TRANSMITTAL TO THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    Immediately after the adoption of a resolution by the Council or the filing of a completed application for amendment of the Zoning Ordinance by at least one owner or lessee of property, said resolution or application shall be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
1131.07 - PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    Upon adoption of a motion by the Planning and Zoning Commission to recommend amendment of the Zoning Ordinance to Council, or upon receipt of notice of a resolution adopted by Council recommending amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, or upon transmittal of a completed application for amendment by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing thereon. Said hearing shall be no more than 30 days from the date of such motion, notice of a resolution, or transmittal of such application. 
(Amendment by Ordinance 91-40; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1(Exh. C), adopted December 19, 2017, repealed  1131.07, which pertained to submission to the director of transportation, and subsequently renumbered the remaining sections 1131.08-1131.14 as 1131.07-1131.13. 
1131.08 - PUBLIC NOTICE OF PROPOSED AMENDMENT BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
(a)  Notice of Public Hearing. Notice of the public hearing required in Section 1131.08, above, shall be on the Municipality of Powell website. Said notice shall be published at least ten days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the proposed amendments and a statement that after the conclusion of such hearing the matter will be referred to the Council for further determination. 
(b)  Notice to Property Owners. If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk, by first class mail, at least ten days before the day of the public hearing to all owners of property within and contiguous to, directly across the street from and within 250 feet of the area to be rezoned or redistricted. Failure to deliver the notifications as provided in the Section shall not invalidate any such amendment. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published on the City website. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.09 - RECOMMENDATION BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    Within 60 days from receipt of the notice of a resolution by Council, transmittal of an application for a zoning amendment, or adoption of an amending action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and after a public hearing on the issue, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment as requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. The written decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall indicate the specific reason(s) upon which the recommendation is based, and shall include the basis for their determination that the proposed amendment is or is not consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. To be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, an amendment must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.10 - PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL. 
    Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council shall schedule a public hearing therein. Said hearing shall be no more than 40 days from the receipt of the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Notice of Public Hearing. Notice of the public hearing required in Section 1131.10 shall be given on the Municipality of Powell website. Said notice shall be published at least ten days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing and a summary of the proposed amendment. 
(b)  Notice to Property Owners. If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk, by first class mail, at least ten days before the day of the public hearing to all owners of property contiguous to, directly across the street from and within 250 feet of the area to be rezoned or redistricted. Failure to deliver the notifications as provided in this section shall not invalidate any such amendment. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published on the City website. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.11 - ACTION BY COUNCIL. 
    Within 30 days after the public hearing required in Section 1131.10 or such longer period as is determined to be appropriate by Council, Council shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or adopt some modification thereof. In the event Council makes a substantial change to the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, it must do so by a vote of not less than three-fourths (six) of all Members of Council or by approval of a majority of all members of Council (four) and subsequent approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If approved by a majority of Council with a substantial change but by less than three-fourths, such ordinance with proposed substantial change stated separately shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If approved by the Commission, then such ordinance with the substantial change shall take effect. If not approved by the Commission, then at the next scheduled Council meeting, Council shall adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission without the substantial changes or adopt the Commission's recommendations with substantial changes with not less than three-fourths (six) of all members of Council. No such Ordinance shall be passed unless it has been fully and distinctly read on two different days and no Ordinance in accordance with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed to pass or take effect without the concurrence of at least a majority of the full membership of Council. The Council shall be deemed to have rejected the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission when less than a majority of its members (four) vote for its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.12 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND REFERENDUM. 
(a)  Such amendment adopted by Council shall become effective 30 days after the date of such adoption unless within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance there is presented to the Clerk of Council a petition, signed by a number of qualified voters residing in the Municipality equal to no less than ten percent of the total vote cast in such area at the last preceding general municipal election, requesting the Council to submit the zoning amendment to the electors for approval or rejection at the next general election. 
(b)  No amendment for which such referendum vote has been requested shall be put into effect unless a majority of the vote cast on the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon certification by the Board of Elections that the amendment has been approved by the voters, it shall take immediate effect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1131.13 - FEE TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR A ZONING AMENDMENT. 
    The Council shall establish the fee to be deposited by an owner or lessee of property filing an application to amend the Zoning Ordinance. Such fees shall be required generally for each application to defray the total costs of advertising, personnel, mailing, and administrative expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1133 - ADMINISTRATION; FEES[15] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and Zoning Commission, Sec. 11.01 
Cross reference- Enforcement and penalty, Ch. 1135 
State Law reference- Violation of zoning ordinances, O.R.C.  713.13 

1133.01 - PURPOSE. 
    This chapter sets forth the powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Council, and the Zoning Administrator with respect to the administration of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1133.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    The formulation, administration and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance is hereby vested in the following offices and bodies within the Municipality of Powell: 
(a)  Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(c)  Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(d)  Council. 
(e)  Director of Law. 
1133.03 - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. 
    A Zoning Administrator appointed by the Mayor shall administer and enforce this Zoning Ordinance. 
1133.04 - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: BONDING. 
    The Zoning Administrator, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall give bond signed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in this State, or, at his option, signed by two or more free holders having real estate in the value of double the amount of the bond, in the amount specified by the Council. Such surety company or real estate bond shall be approved by the municipality Council, and the bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Zoning Administrator's official duties. 
1133.05 - RESPONSIBILITIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. 
    For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties: 
(a)  Enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and interpret the meaning and application of its provisions. 
(b)  Respond to questions concerning applications for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text and the Official Zoning District Map. 
(c)  Issue zoning certificates and certificates of zoning compliance as provided by this Zoning Ordinance, and keep a record of same with a notation of any special conditions involved. 
(d)  Act on all applications upon which he is authorized to act by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance within the specified time or notify the applicant in writing of his refusal or disapproval of such application and the reasons therefore. Failure to notify the applicant in case of such refusal or disapproval within the specified time shall entitle the applicant to submit his request to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(e)  Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to determine compliance with this Zoning Ordinance, and, in the case of any violation, to notify in writing the person(s) responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action. 
(f)  Maintain in current status the Official Zoning District Map, a copy of which shall be kept on permanent display in the Municipality offices or on the city's website. 
(g)  Maintain permanent and current records required by this Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to zoning certificates, certificates of zoning compliance, inspection documents, approved planned district development plans, and records of all variances, amendments, and special uses. 
(h)  Make such records available for the use of the Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the public. 
(i)  Review and approve site plans pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance. 
(j)  Determine the existence of any violations of this Zoning Ordinance, and cause such notifications, revocation notices, stop orders, or tickets to be issued, or initiate such other administrative or legal action as needed, to address such violations. 
(k)  Prepare and submit an annual report to the Planning and Zoning Commission on the administration of this Ordinance, setting forth such information as may be of interest and value in advancing and furthering the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance. Such report shall include recommendations concerning the schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1133.06 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be created in accordance with the City of Powell Charter Section 11.01. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, 3-15-2005) 
1133.07 - MEETINGS AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    The Commission shall meet at least once a month unless there are no submitted applications for that month. All meetings shall be held at the municipality offices or other public building within the municipality. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, the facts of each case, other official actions and other minutes of the meeting, all of which shall be a public record and shall be immediately filed with the Clerk of the Commission, a copy of which shall be sent to the Clerk of the Council. The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of four members of said Commission shall be necessary for the approval of a Commission action or to reverse a previous decision or determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1133.08 - DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance the Commission shall have the following duties: 
(a)  To prepare, adopt, and periodically update a comprehensive plan for community development (a policies plan for the development of the municipality), and to recommend that plan to Council for confirming adoption by Ordinance. 
(b)  Recommend the proposed Zoning Ordinance, including text and Official Zoning District Map to the Council for formal adoption. 
(c)  Initiate advisable Official Zoning District Map changes, or changes in the text of the Zoning Ordinance where same are consistent with the comprehensive plan adopted by the Commission and will promote the best interests of the public through recommendation to the Council. 
(d)  Review all proposed amendments to the text of this Zoning Ordinance and the Official Zoning District Map and make recommendations to the Council as specified in Chapter 1131. 
(e)  Review all Planned District development proposals and applications and make recommendations to the Council as provided in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(f)  Review all other development proposals as necessary and applications and make recommendations to the Council as provided in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Review all special uses as identified in the respective zoning districts according to provisions and criteria stated in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Carry on a continuous review of the effectiveness and appropriateness of this Zoning Ordinance and recommend such changes or amendments as it feels would be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1133.09 - CLERK TO THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
    To assist in the administration of this Zoning Ordinance, a Clerk shall be appointed by the Board upon the approval by the Council to maintain records, confirm information in applications, process all notices, and perform such other duties relating to this Zoning Ordinance as the Board may from time to time direct. Salary and/or other compensation shall be established by the Council. 
1133.10 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be created in accordance with the City of Powell Charter Section 11.02. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, 3-15-2005) 
1133.11 - PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    The Board shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs in keeping with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the vice chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed with the Clerk of the Board, a copy of which will be sent to the Clerk of the Council. Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of two members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order or determination of the Zoning Administrator, to decide in favor of an applicant in any matter over which the Board has original jurisdiction under this Zoning Ordinance, or to grant any variance from the requirements stipulated in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1133.12 - DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance the Board has the following specific responsibilities: 
(a)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Authorize such variances from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to the special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Zoning Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. Such variances shall only be awarded in strict compliance with the conditions of Chapter 1127. 
(c)  Grant conditional use zoning permits as specified in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1133.13 - CLERK TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    To assist in the administration of this Zoning Ordinance, a Clerk shall be appointed by the Board upon the approval by the Council to maintain Board of Zoning Appeals records, confirm information in applications, process all notices required under this Zoning Ordinance, record the minutes of the board, and perform such other duties relating to this Zoning Ordinance as the Board may from time to time direct. Salary and/or other compensation shall be established by the Council. 
1133.14 - APPEALS. 
(a)  It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board shall be to the courts as provided by law. It is further the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that the duties of the Council in connection with this Zoning Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. 
(b)  The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this Zoning Ordinance. Under this Zoning Ordinance the Council shall only have the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Zoning Ordinance as provided by law, and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 1133.16 of this Zoning Ordinance. Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted to prevent any official of the Municipality from appealing a decision of the Board to the courts as provided in Chapters 2505 and 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code. Any such appeal shall be made within ten days of the Board's written decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1133.15 - COUNCIL. 
    The powers and duties of the Council pertaining to the Planning and Zoning Ordinance are as follows: 
(a)  Appoint Council's members on the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(b)  Appoint Council's members of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(c)  Initiate or act upon suggested amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text or Official Zoning District Map. Final action upon a suggested zoning amendment shall be undertaken at a public hearing. 
(d)  Approve a written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(e)  Override a written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission on a text or map amendment provided that such legislative action is passed by a vote of not less than three-quarters of all members of the Council. 
(f)  Provide for the compensation of clerks for the Planning and Zoning Commission and for the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(g)  Set and approve the bond required of the Zoning Administrator. 
(h)  Establish by ordinance a schedule of Zoning related fees. 
1133.16 - SCHEDULE OF FEES. 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish a schedule of fees for zoning certificates, amendments, appeals, variances, conditional use permits, plan approvals, and other procedures and services pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance, after considering the administrative costs, both direct and indirect. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered or amended only be the Council. Until all such appropriate fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no final action shall be taken on any application, appeal, or administrative procedure. 
CHAPTER 1135 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY[16] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Appeals from zoning decisions, O.R.C.  713.11, Ch. 2506; Violation of zoning ordinances, O.R.C.  713.13 

1135.01 - GENERAL. 
    This chapter stipulates the procedures to be followed in obtaining zoning certificates and other legal or administrative approvals under this Zoning Ordinance. 
1135.02 - ZONING CERTIFICATES REQUIRED. 
(a)  No building, sign or other structure shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, added to, demolished, structurally altered, nor shall any work be started on same, nor shall any building, structure, or land be established or changed in use without a certificate therefor, issued by the Zoning Administrator. Zoning certificates shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance unless the Zoning Administrator receives a written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal, conditional use, or variance, or from Council approving a Planned District Development, as provided by this Zoning Ordinance. The use of the building, structure or land shall be determined with each change in occupancy and reviewed for overall compliance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  In areas where a residence is occupied, only one zoning certificate may be issued and active at any time for improvements related to said property. 
(c)  No zoning certificate shall be required for any agricultural building to be erected on land presently used for agricultural purposes or for any building incidental to the agricultural use of the land which said buildings are proposed to be located, nor shall a certificate be required for the use of land or building or construction of any building used for public utility or railroad purposes for the operation of its business. The term "for the operation of its business" shall not be deemed to include general offices or other such uses not related to provision of utility or railroad purposes. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, no tract of land of less than five acres shall be considered agricultural in nature, nor shall same be subject to exemption. 
(Ord. No. 99-50, 10-19-1999) 
1135.03 - CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR ZONING CERTIFICATE. 
(a)  Application for a zoning certificate shall be made in writing and be signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state that the certificate shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within six months or substantially completed within one year. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by all required fees: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of applicant; 
(2)  Legal description of property; 
(3)  Existing use; 
(4)  Proposed use; 
(5)  Zoning district; 
(6)  Plans in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on the lot, if any; the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or alteration; front, side, and rear yard setbacks; 
(7)  Building heights; 
(8)  Location and design of access drives; 
(9)  Number of dwelling units; 
(10)  If applicable, application for a sign permit or a conditional, special, or temporary use permit, unless previously submitted; 
(11)  A separate off-street parking and loading plan indicating the number of off-street parking spaces or loading spaces, and their layout, as specified in this Zoning Ordinance, and other such information; 
(12)  Such other documentation as may be necessary to determine compliance with all the applicable provisions of, and to provide for the enforcement of, this Zoning Ordinance; 
(13)  In every case where the lot is not served and is not proposed to be served with public water supply and/or the disposal of sanitary wastes by means of public sewers, the application shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval by the Delaware County Health Department for the proposed method of water supply and/or disposal of sanitary wastes. 
(14)  Documentation that the proposal has been submitted in writing to the homeowners association involved with the property in question, if architectural review is required by deed restriction and covenant, and that such submittal was received by the association. 
(Ord. No. 2005-29, 6-7-2005) 
1135.04 - APPROVAL OF ZONING CERTIFICATE. 
    Within 30 days after the receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. If the application has involvement with a homeowner's association architectural review, as identified in Section 1135.03(a)(14), then the Zoning Administrator shall approve the zoning certificate if one of the following occur and all other zoning requirements are met: 
(a)  That the application has been approved by the association. 
(b)  That more than 30 days have elapsed since such submittal and such submittal has not been denied by the homeowners association or the homeowners association has failed to take action in writing denying such application. 
(c)  That the homeowner association has acted in denying such application and listed the reasons behind such denial, but the Zoning Administrator finds the homeowner has made a good faith effort to accommodate the concerns of the homeowners association. 
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator, after the Zoning Administrator shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. One copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the fact that the activity is in conformance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-29, 6-7-2005) 
1135.05 - PERIOD OF EFFECTIVENESS OF A ZONING CERTIFICATE. 
    Any new proposed construction for which a Zoning Certificate is issued shall be commenced within six months of issuance of the certificate and the ground story framework, including structural parts of a second floor or roof shall have been completed within one year after the issuance of the Zoning Certificate; provided, however, that any project or building originally contemplated to be constructed in phases or for a period longer than one year may be completed in phases or during such extended time if in accordance with a timetable placed on file with the Zoning Administrator with the original request for the certificate. 
1135.06 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, adopted December 19, 2017, deleted  1135.06 from the Code. Former  1135.06 pertained to submission to the director of transportation. 
1135.07 - EXPIRATION OF ZONING CERTIFICATE. 
    If the work described in any zoning certificate has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said certificate shall expire; it shall be revoked by the Zoning Administrator; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. If the work described in any zoning certificate has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, as described in Section 1135.05, said certificate shall expire and be revoked by the Zoning Administrator, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled certificate shall not proceed unless and until a new zoning certificate has been obtained or an extension granted. 
1135.08 - CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued therefor by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use and structure of the building and the land use conforms to all of the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, including those certifications required in the Historic District and by architectural review, and a state building permit will be required in commercial situations where such permits are necessary. The issuance of such a certificate in no way relieves the recipient from compliance with all the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and other regulations. 
1135.09 - TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. 
    A temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. 
1135.10 - RECORD OF ZONING CERTIFICATES AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning certificates and certificates of zoning compliance, and copies shall be furnished, upon request and upon payment of the established fee, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
1135.11 - FAILURE TO OBTAIN A ZONING CERTIFICATE OR CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. 
    Failure to obtain a zoning certificate or certificate of zoning compliance shall be a punishable violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1135.12 - CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS, PERMITS, AND CERTIFICATES. 
    Zoning certificates or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a punishable violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1135.13 - NONCONFORMING USES. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the lawful continuance of a nonconforming use as hereinbefore authorized unless a discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or property. 
1135.14 - COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS. 
    Whenever a violation of this Zoning Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate it, report the complaint and his findings to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and take action thereon as provided by this Zoning Ordinance. 
1135.15 - ENTRY AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTY. 
    The Zoning Administrator is authorized to make inspections of properties and structures in order to examine and survey the same, at any reasonable hour, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Prior to seeking entry to any property or structure for such examination or survey, the Zoning Administrator shall attempt to obtain the permission of the owner or occupant to inspect. If such permission is denied or cannot be obtained, the Zoning Administrator shall request the assistance of the Director of Law in securing a valid search warrant prior to entry. 
1135.16 - STOP WORK ORDER. 
    Subsequent to his determination that work is being done contrary to this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall write a stop work order and post it on the premises involved. Removal of a stop work order, except by the order of the Zoning Administrator, shall constitute a punishable violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1135.17 - ZONING CERTIFICATE REVOCATION. 
    The Zoning Administrator may issue a revocation notice to revoke a zoning certificate or administrative approval which was issued contrary to this Zoning Ordinance or based upon false information or misrepresentation in the application. 
1135.18 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION. 
    Whenever the Zoning Administrator or his agent determines that there is a violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance, a warning tag shall be issued and shall serve as a notice of violation. Such order shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Identify the violation; 
(c)  Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued and refer to the sections of this Zoning Ordinance being violated; and 
(d)  State the time by which the violation shall be corrected. 
(e)  Service of notice of violation shall be as follows: 
(1)  By personal delivery to the person or persons responsible, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of residence of the owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or 
(2)  By ordinary mail, and the mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing which shall be filed by the Zoning Administrator. Service shall be deemed complete when the fact of mailing is entered of record, provided that the ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an endorsement showing failure of delivery; or 
(3)  By certified mail deposited in the United States Post Office addressed to the person or persons responsible at a last known address. 
(4)  By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises found in violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998) 
1135.19 - TICKETING PROCEDURE. 
(a)  If, upon re-inspection following the issuance of a notice of violation, the condition has not been corrected, the person or persons responsible shall be issued a ticket. Such ticket shall: 
(1)  Be served personally; 
(2)  Be in writing; 
(3)  Identify the violation; 
(4)  State the time, date and place for appearance in court; and 
(5)  State the amount of the fine payable in lieu of a court appearance. 
(b)  If the ticket cannot be served personally, the Zoning Administrator shall request that a summons be issued by the Court. 
1135.20 - PENALTIES AND FINES. 
    It shall be unlawful to use, maintain, erect, establish, locate, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, convert, move, repair, maintain, demolish, or structurally alter any building, structure or land in violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment or supplement thereto, or of Section 713, of the Revised Code. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this Zoning Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $150.00 per offense and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues after receipt of a violation notice shall be considered a separate offense irrespective of whether or not a separate notice of violation or affidavit charging a violation has been served upon the violator for each day the offense continues. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
1135.21 - ADDITIONAL REMEDIES. 
    Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to abolish, impair or prevent other additional remedies as provided by law. In the event of a violation of any provision or requirement of this Zoning Ordinance, or in the case of an imminent threat of such a violation, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Administrator, the Director of Law, or the owner of any neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such violation, may, in addition to other recourses provided by law, institute mandamus, injunction, abatement, or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, remove, abate, enjoin, or terminate such violation. The Council may employ special counsel to represent it in any proceeding or to prosecute any actions brought under this section. 
TITLE FIVE - ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Unless otherwise indicated at the end of a section, Ordinance 91-01, passed February 5, 1991, composed Title Three and Five of this Part Eleven-Planning and Zoning Code. 

CHAPTER 1141 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS[18] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Basis of districts, O.R.C.  713.10 

1141.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish zoning districts in order to realize the general purposes set forth in the preamble of this Zoning Ordinance, to provide for orderly growth and development, and to protect the property rights of all individuals by assuring the compatibility of uses and practices within districts. 
1141.02 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. 
    The following ten zoning districts are hereby established for the Municipality of Powell, Ohio: 
R - Residence District 
DR - Downtown Residence District 
DB - Downtown Business District 
PR - Planned Residence District 
PRC - Planned Residence Conservation District 
PO - Planned Office District 
PC - Planned Commercial District 
PI - Planned Industrial District 
DD- Downtown District Overlay District 
OR - Olentangy River Environment Overlay District 
AR - Architectural Review Overlay District 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1141.03 - ZONING DISTRICT MAP. 
    The districts established in Section 1141.02, and as may be indicated on the Official Zoning Map, together with all data, references, explanatory material and notations thereon, are hereby officially adopted as part of this Zoning Ordinance and hereby incorporated by reference herein, thereby having the same force and effect as if herein fully described in writing. 
1141.04 - ZONING MAP LEGEND. 
    There shall be provided on the Official Zoning Map a legend which shall list the name of each zoning district and indicate the symbol for that district. A color, combination of colors, or black and white patterns may be used in place of symbols to identify the respective zoning districts in such legend. In addition to such legend, the Official Zoning Map shall provide sufficient space for compliance with Section 1141.07. 
1141.05 - IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
    The Official Zoning Map shall be properly identified by the signature of the Mayor, as attested by the Clerk, and bearing the official seal. The Map shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator, and shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk. A copy of the Map shall also be appended to each copy of the text of the Zoning Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall control whenever there is an apparent conflict between the district boundaries as shown on the Map and the description(s) as found in the text of this Ordinance or any other ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be a reproducible document, and individual copies shall be made available to the public upon request including attachment of all relevant amendments, and upon payment of a fee as established by ordinance. The Map shall be recertified by the Mayor and the Clerk at least every 24 months and each time it is amended. 
1141.06 - INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
(a)  The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary unless such boundary is specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are so indicated as approximately following the center lines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets, or the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map and as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad line; 
(5)  Where the boundary of a district follows a stream or other body of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the center line of the body of water unless otherwise indicated; 
(6)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they follow or approximately follow the boundary limits of any municipal corporation or other unit of government, such boundaries shall be construed as following such limits; 
(7)  Where the boundary of a district follows a metes and bounds description approved as a part of a rezoning or annexation of any territory, said metes and bounds description shall control over all of the foregoing; and 
(8)  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official Council action, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall automatically be extended to the center of such vacation, and all areas within that vacation shall thenceforth be subject to all regulations appropriate to the respective extended districts. 
(b)  All questions and disputes concerning the exact location of zoning district boundaries shall be resolved by the Zoning Administrator consistent with these guidelines for interpretation. 
1141.07 - ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS. 
    Within 15 days of the effective date of any change of a zoning district classification or boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall amend the Official Zoning Map to reflect such change, and shall note the effective date of such change, together with appropriate reference to the ordinance authorizing such change. 
1141.08 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, adopted December 19, 2017, deleted  1141.08, which pertained to zoning upon annexation and derived from Ord. No. 91-40. 
CHAPTER 1143 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS[19] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Supplementary district regulations, Ch. 1145; Special regulations, Ch. 1147 

1143.01 - COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. 
    The regulations for each district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided that: 
(a)  No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered: 
(1)  To provide for greater height or bulk; 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(3)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces; than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
1143.02 - OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED. 
    District regulations shall be as set forth in the Official Schedule of District Regulations, which is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this Zoning Ordinance and in Chapters 1145 and 1147. 
1143.03 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, adopted December 19, 2017, deleted  1143.03, which pertained to identification of the official schedule of district regulations. 
1143.04 - R-RESIDENCE DISTRICT; PURPOSE. 
    There is hereby created an "R" ("Residence") District to protect and promote an appropriate low density village scale, and rural residential scale of development. 
ZONING DISTRICT: R-RESIDENCE 
Official Schedule of Permitted Uses and Dimensional Requirements 
PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Single-family detached dwellings Plant materials nursery Elderly households Home occupations Elderly housing units Churches Accessory buildings and uses Convalescent homes Agricultural buildings/uses Nursing homes Agriculture Homes for children or aged Child day-care Life-care facilities Elderly housing facilities Congregate housing Golf courses, country clubs Cemeteries Noncommercial kennels and catteries associated with a residence Class I, Type B Group Residence facilities (5 or less residents) Roadside sale of agricultural products produced on the premises Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas  
MIN LOT per dwelling unit 43,560 sq. ft. MINIMUM LOT FOR ANY USE 43,560 sq. ft. MIN. LOT WIDTH: 
  lots < 3 acres: 
  
180 feet   lots 3 but < 4 acres: 200 feet   lots 4 but < 5 acres: 250 feet   lots 5 acres or more: 300 feet MIN PRINCIPAL BLDG SETBACK: 
  front: 
70 feet   each side: 25 feet   rear: 80 feet MIN ACCESSORY BLDG SETBACK: 
  front:   
70 feet   each side: 25 feet   rear: 50 feet MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE IN PERCENT: 25% MAX BLDG HEIGHT: 
  principal bldgs:   
35 feet   accessory bldgs: 18 feet MIN FLOOR AREA/DWELLING UNIT: 1,500 sq. ft. MIN CHURCH SITE: 3 acres plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area.  
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.08 - PLANNED DISTRICTS; GENERAL. 
(a)  Established. The following seven districts: 
PR - Planned Residence District; 
PRC - Planned Residence Conservation District, 
PO - Planned Office District; 
PC - Planned Commercial District, 
PI - Planned Industrial District, 
DR - Downtown Residence District, and 
DB - Downtown Business District, 
are herein designated as "planned districts" in which development shall be regulated by the requirements and procedures as designated for planned districts in this chapter. Development in these planned districts shall meet all of the requirements established elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, including those in the Supplemental Regulations, Signs, Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. However, in these districts the permitted uses, their locations, and their intensity are not rigidly fixed. Rather a framework is provided, in furtherance of the purposes of these districts, for the arrival at a plan for the development of land in such districts involving the careful selection and integrated planning of land uses, utilities, parkland and environmental conservation areas, pedestrian/bicycle/jogging paths and equestrian paths, the service street system, and associated collector streets, major streets and parkways that is consistent with the content and emphasis established in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Planned District Standards. Wherever development standards are specified herein or elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as in the official schedules of permitted uses and dimensional requirements, these standards shall apply except where other such standards have previously been established and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission for areas located in planned districts. The official schedules of dimensional requirements shall provide a guide for approval of Development Plans, but can be modified as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Where standards are not specified, the Planning and Zoning Commission, in approving a planned district development plan, shall establish such requirements as it deems necessary to protect and promote the public health, safety, and/or welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.09 - PLANNED DISTRICTS; PURPOSE. 
    There are hereby created the following districts, designated as "planned districts." It is the purpose of these districts to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the regulation of planned developments. These districts are so created in order to permit the careful and coordinated physical planning and development of the land, to provide flexibility in the location of land uses, housing types, and their intensity, and to provide incentives for provision of public parkland and private environmental conservation easements, public access pedestrian/bicycle/jogging paths and equestrian paths, the private construction of public parkways, and the construction of high quality housing through provision of housing density bonuses for the provision of such amenities, while simultaneously protecting and preserving the natural environment, providing for surface drainage runoff control, limiting the buildup of residential and through traffic on already congested access points into the area between the two rivers and on existing and future major streets, encouraging inclusion of pedestrian scale design elements, and conserving and enhancing the community and regional character as a green, open, rural setting, permitting development yet constraining the tendency to overbuild the region. It is the intent of these regulations to provide maximum opportunity for orderly large-scale development that benefits the community as a whole by offering a greater choice in living environments and a wider range of development plans featuring a more complementary blending of land uses and community facilities, and a more unified approach with respect to the mixture of uses and their adaptation to topological and geological features, recreational and natural environment preservation opportunities, and transportation needs. 
(a)  Interpretation. Whenever the requirements of Sections 1143.07-1143.16 on Planned Districts appears to be in conflict with other sections of this Zoning Ordinance, or with those of other existing codes, the provisions of these sections shall prevail, except where otherwise noted. 
(b)  Planned District Location. The location and extent of Planned Districts shall be as described herein or as designated on the Official Zoning Map. 
(c)  Conditions Applicable to all Planned Districts. 
(1)  Required compliance with Comprehensive Plan. Each approved Planned District Development Plan must be consistent with the standards, goals and requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission [and City Council], including land uses, the general location of trafficways and their character, the provision of equestrian and/or pedestrian/jogging/bicycle pathways, etc., and any other feature or quality specifically noted in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Uses. Uses in planned districts shall be as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as selected by the Commission from the specific lists of permitted uses and conditional permitted uses presented herein relative to the planned district category in question. Large non-residential establishments, as defined by Section 1147.15(b)(1), shall also be reviewed through the special use permit process established within Section 1147.15, and shall meet the requirements within that section or those of the planned district where the large non-residential establishment is located within, whichever requirement is more restrictive. 
(3)  Religious, cultural and educational uses. Religious, cultural, and educational land uses and facilities are permitted uses in every Planned District, provided that: 
A.  They are designed and intended to serve just the immediate and nearby residents of the district, or, if designed, intended, or projected to serve a larger area of the community or of the region as a whole, they must be located in such proximity to a major thoroughfare as to permit access without travel along streets that primarily provide a residential service function; and 
B.  Each such use shall have a net site area of no less than three acres, plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area. 
(4)  Open space; recreational facilities. Common open space and recreational facilities: requirements and disposition: 
A.  No less than 20 percent of the land in any approved Planned District Development Plan shall be designated common open space or permanently natural scenic preserves, arranged and restricted by easement, covenant, deed, or dedication to assure that such open spaces shall be permanently preserved and maintained. Such open spaces shall not include publicly dedicated streets, land in the right-of-ways of private streets, off-street parking areas, or loading areas; 
B.  Planned residence developments may provide, as a part of the parkland dedication requirement of subsection (c)(4)A., at least one five acre relatively flat grassed common area for neighborhood field recreation, preferably integrated with a neighborhood pedestrian/jogging/bicycle path system, or system of common areas, tot lots, or other similar areas at least five acres total in area. The size, shape and amount of publicly dedicated park space shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as part of the development plan process. City Council may authorize a fee-in-lieu of dedication payment as determined by the Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time, and/or require parkland dedication. 
C.  Where parkways are projected in or adjacent to the Planned District area, such required open spaces as in subsections (c)(4)A. and B., shall be located immediately adjacent to the parkway right-of-way to the degree and in the manner approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
D.  All natural drainage courses, flood plain areas, ravine-bottom areas, and lands with slopes in excess of six percent shall be retained, with their vegetation in its natural state, in natural scenic open space preserves. 
E.  Required common open space areas reserved in a Planned District Development Plan shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area, for the use of each owner who buys property within the development, or shall be dedicated to a homeowner's association who shall have title to the land which shall be retained as common open space for parks, recreation, and related uses, or shall be dedicated to public ownership and use for such purposes. This will be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council during the development plan review process. 
F.  Legal articles relating to the organization of a homeowners' association are subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall provide adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of all common areas and facilities. Covenants assuring perpetual maintenance of private properties as permanent natural preserves are equally subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
G.  Public utility and similar easements and right-of-ways are not acceptable for common open space dedication in a Planned District Development Plan unless such land and right-of-ways are to be used for trail or other public purposes. Alternative systems of providing common open space must be specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
H.  The ownership of, and responsibility for the maintenance of, all open spaces in a Planned District Development Plan shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
(5)  Maximum multi-family dwelling units. 
A.  In any Planned District Development Plan the maximum number of multi-family dwelling units shall in no case exceed the number of units set forth in the development standards for the particular zoning district in which that property is proposed to be located. 
B.  In any Planned District Development Plan the maximum number of multi-family dwelling units, on any single acre, shall not exceed 12 per acre. 
(6)  Circulation system. The circulation system and parking facilities provided in a Planned District shall be designed to fully accommodate vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and, where applicable, equestrian movement with safety and efficiency; innovative roadway design is encouraged to insure the preservation of natural features, the creation of a variety of vistas and views, and retention/creation of a natural rural, green and open-space-focused environment. The circulation and parking systems shall show points of access and egress from properties, all public and private drives, parking areas, pedestrian/jogging/bicycle paths, and equestrian paths if applicable. Planned District Plans shall be designed to minimize circulation conflict points between vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian traffic. 
(7)  Utilities. Underground utilities, including telephone, cable television, and electrical systems are required within the limits of all Planned District developments. Appurtenances to these systems which can be effectively screened may be exempted from this requirement if the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the proposed Planned District development. Fiber, fiber conduit and/or another such other utility may be required at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Engineer for the purposes of public service. 
(8)  Special provisions for lower or moderately priced housing in Planned Districts. In order to provide for the availability of lower and moderately priced rental and sale residences within Planned Districts, the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit the following: 
A.  A Planned District Development Plan proposing the inclusion of no less than ten percent lower or moderately priced rental or sale dwelling units may reduce the minimum lot, street frontage, distance between buildings, and yard requirements in the Plan area as specified for the Planned District within which it is located, provided that such reductions shall not exceed ten percent of the standards set for such conditions in the District and that buffering and screening devices are deemed by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be adequate. 
B.  A Planned District Development Plan proposing the inclusion of no less than ten percent lower or moderately priced rental or sale dwelling units may entail a dwelling unit count ten percent in excess of the dwelling units otherwise permitted in the district, and/or ten percent in excess of the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on any one acre in subsection (c)(4), above. 
C.  Where such reductions are provided for, each such lower to moderately priced dwelling unit in a Planned District shall abut common open space or similar areas, provided, however, that any such residential property not abutting such uses shall have well designed and convenient access to, and shall be located no more than 500 feet from, such uses. 
D.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, "lower and moderately priced rental and sale residences" shall be interpreted as meaning: 
New dwelling units priced for sale or rent that are no more than seven percent above the average price/rental for such new dwelling units in the Columbus metropolitan area as reported by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the latest calendar year prior to the submission of the planned district proposal. 
(9)  Arrangement of Commercial, Office, Industrial, and Warehouse/Wholesale Uses. Where planned districts include commercial, office, industrial, and/or warehouse/ wholesale uses, such buildings and establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential conflict points and accident locations at intersections with streets. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of the development areas consisting of these uses where they abut residential areas, church sites, or public lands. The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for internal traffic circulation, landscaping, coordinated signage, and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas all as determined and designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvements or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and orderly manner as may be specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(10)  Residential Subareas in Planned Office (PO), Planned Commercial (PC) and/or Planned Industrial Districts. 
A.  Where new residential uses are to be provided for in a planned district plan of development other than for Planned Residence (PR) and such uses occupy more than one acre or total more than nine dwelling units, the subarea shall be designated as a PR-Planned Residence District in the development plan and shall therefore meet all of the requirements specified for the PR-Planned Residence District, including those regarding housing density and physical arrangements. 
B.  Multifamily residential units located in planned districts other than PR-Planned Residence Districts shall be clustered around woodland, lake or stream bed features. 
C.  The area for calculation of the permitted number of dwelling units in nonresidential planned districts shall include the area in the total planned development that is in dedicated parkland, scenic easements, setback open spaces in excess of 50 feet, runoff retention basins, other water areas, and the area designated specifically for residential use. 
D.  Approval of development of such residential units shall be contingent upon or include completion of the associated parkway or bypass systems serving these sites. 
(11)  Development Phasing. The first phase of development of a Planned District, according to an approved Planned District Development Plan and development timetable, shall in no case be less than five acres or the entire tract, whichever is smaller. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require larger first phase commitments where it deems this necessary. All sections of the planned development tract not planned for development in the phase submitted shall be clearly designated as to future intended sub-district use, area and density. 
(12)  Additional Requirements. The Powell Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Council may impose special additional conditions relating to the development of a Planned District Development with regard to the type and extent of public improvements to be installed; landscaping, development, improvement, and maintenance of common open spaces; and any other pertinent development characteristics. 
(13)  Pedestrian Scale Design Guidelines Manuals. The Powell Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council find and determine that it is important to articulate pedestrian scale design principles for incorporation into Planned District Development Plans in order to meet the purposes of Planned Districts set forth above. Toward this end, a Pedestrian Scale Design Guidelines Manual dated November 4, 2009 (as amended from time to time with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission) is hereby adopted. Unless justification satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council is provided, this Manual shall be utilized by a property owner in whole or in part as a guideline for developing proper Pedestrian Scale Design features within a Planned District Development Plan. 
(14)  Required approval of Planned District Development Plan. No development shall be undertaken, no construction and/or earth moving of any kind shall be begun, and/or no new land uses shall be initiated in a Planned District unless consistent with an approved Planned District Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-27, 11-4-2009; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.10 - CONDITIONAL USES IN PLANNED DISTRICTS. 
    Uses specified as conditional uses in planned districts shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and in conjunction with development plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council, following the same criteria and processes as in all other districts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.11 - PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL OF PLANNED DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT PLANS. 
    Planned District Development Plans shall be approved in accordance with the procedures established herein in this section. 
(a)  Pre-application Meeting, otherwise known as a Sketch Plan. The developer shall meet with the City Manager, with the Zoning Administrator, and with the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to submission of a preliminary development plan. The purpose of such meetings is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of this Zoning Ordinance and the criteria and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the developer with zoning and other applicable regulations; it being understood that no statements by officials of Powell, Ohio, or Planning and Zoning Commission members, made in such informal meetings shall be binding on either party. 
(b)  Filing of a Combined Preliminary and Final Development Plan. Upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission at the pre-application (Sketch Plan) meeting, and applicant may be permitted to file a combined preliminary and final development plan following the procedures as set forth in subsection (h) hereof, as if the applicant had received approval in principal of the preliminary development plan. 
(c)  Preliminary Planned District Development Plan Application Requirements. An application for preliminary Planned District Development Plan approval shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner of the property for which Planned District development is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information. Where any of this information is missing or incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall so notify the applicant and no additional actions need be taken until such missing material is provided. 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of applicant; 
(2)  Name, address, and phone number of registered surveyor, registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary development plan; 
(3)  Legal description of the property; 
(4)  A description of present use(s) on and of the land; 
(5)  A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Zoning Inspector showing all property lines, existing streets and alleys, approved future streets and land uses on adjacent Planned District areas, transportation and land use elements of the Municipality's adopted Comprehensive Plan, current zoning classifications and boundaries, and current land uses on the site of the proposed Planned District development and in the surrounding areas to the physical extent deemed necessary by the Zoning Inspector, but no less than 250 feet beyond the limits of the proposed Planned District Development Plan. 
(6)  A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the Zoning Administrator illustrating: 
A.  The property line definition and dimensions of the perimeter of the site; 
B.  Right-of-ways and paving widths of all existing, currently platted, and previously approved Planned District streets and alleys adjacent to, on, or abutting the site; 
C.  The area of the site and its subareas in acres; 
D.  The topography of the site and abutting areas at no more than five foot contour intervals; 
E.  Existing surface drainageways and surface sheet flow patterns; 
F.  Flood plain areas, ravine-bottom areas, and areas of ground slope in excess of six percent; 
G.  Existing vegetation on the site with specific tree spots for all trees six inches in diameter or greater, measured 24 inches from the ground. 
H.  Existing easements on the site with notations as to their type, extent, and nature; 
I.  The location and dimensions of existing utilities on and adjacent to the site, including the nearest sanitary sewer, with manhole invert elevations; 
J.  Calculation of the maximum residential units permitted on the site under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, including delineation of the subdistricts of the site upon which these calculations have been made; 
K.  A preliminary plan for the first, or next, phase of site development illustrating: 
1.  New street centerlines, right-of-ways, and street classification types; 
2.  Names of existing and proposed streets; 
3.  Generalized lot and block layouts, indicating and illustrating property lines, minimum lot areas, minimum building setbacks and yards, location and extent of major off-street parking areas, etc.; 
4.  Subareas of the site to be developed, by land use type, housing types, and housing densities, including subarea statistics; 
5.  All proposed structures shall be located showing square footage, tenant or user types, and expected entranceways and service or loading areas; 
6.  Common open areas, public lands, and natural scenic easements, including the area of each; 
7.  Proposed landscape treatment of the site; 
8.  Proposed utility patterns and provisions, including sanitary sewer, individual waste disposal systems, storm sewer, trash collection systems, outdoor lighting, and water supply, including relevant easements and engineering feasibility studies or other evidences of reasonableness; 
9.  Provisions for accommodating surface drainage runoff; 
10.  Proposed architectural design criteria; 
11.  Proposed pedestrian/jogging/bicycle pathways and equestrian paths, including locations, dimensions, landscape and construction, including relationships of such pathways to existing and proposed future pathways on surrounding property; 
12.  Overall site development statistics comparing this plan for development with requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and indicating that all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and the comprehensive plan have been met in this preliminary plan and will be met in final development. 
L.  Projected development schedule by subareas of the entire planned development site, and for the first, or next, phase of development, including land uses, public areas, natural and scenic reserves, streets, buildings, utilities, and other facilities, indicating the relationship of the proposed development to existing and probable uses of surrounding areas during the development timetable; 
M.  An overall traffic scheme, illustrating points of access, parking areas, including the number of parking spaces and indicating visitor, employee and service traffic flow, illustrating calculated peak hour traffic use for residents and employees as well as deliveries and other transport and the effect of this traffic on the community traffic ways. 
N.  If to be developed in phases, the entire site development shall be described in outline and diagrammatic plan form, and in a complementing detailed text in a manner calculated to assure City officials that Planned Development requirements and other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be met in the detailed development of the phases to follow, and that the entire Planned Development area will meet all of the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, such diagrams and descriptive texts being accepted with, and becoming a part of the extended zoning plan for the entire site; 
(7)  Evidences, as determined by the Zoning Administrator in his/her sole discretion, of the ability of the applicant to carry forth its plan by control of the land and the engineering feasibility of the plan, and that the applicant has sufficient control over the land and financing to initiate the proposed development plan phase within two years; 
(8)  Evidence of the applicant's ability to post a bond if the plan is approved assuring completion of public service facilities to be constructed within the project area by the developer; 
(9)  Verification by the owner of the property that all the information in the application is true and correct to the best of his knowledge. 
(10)  A statement of the character and nature of the development including the cost range or rent levels for housing in residential development and the general types of business or industrial and commercial developments. 
(11)  A statement of the general impact the development will have on the infrastructure, municipality and schools including projected demographics, a traffic impact study and a fiscal impact analysis may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(12)  A fee as established by ordinance. 
(d)  Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the application for approval of the preliminary development plan not less than ten or more than 40 days from the date of filing of a completed application and certification by the Zoning Administrator that to the best of his knowledge the preliminary development plan application is complete and that the preliminary development plan, as best he can determine, meets all of the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  Notice of Public Hearing. 
(1)  Before holding the public hearing, notice of such Commission hearing shall be given on the Municipality of Powell website at least ten days before the date of said hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, a general description of the planned district development, and a statement that, after the public hearing and after submission of a final development plan, the matter will be referred to the Council for further determination. 
(2)  Also before holding the public hearing, written notice of such hearing shall be sent by the Planning and Zoning Commission by first class mail, at least ten days before the hearing, to all owners of property Contiguous to, directly across the street from and within 250 feet of the property in question and to such others as the Commission determines should receive such notice. Notices to individual property owners shall contain the same information as required of notices published on the City website. 
(f)  Public Access to Proposed Planned District Plans. For a period of at least ten days prior to the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission, all papers relating to the planned district development plan shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Zoning Administrator or on the Municipality of Powell website. 
(g)  Approval in Principle of Preliminary Development Plan. Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary development plan to determine if it is consistent with the intent of this Zoning Ordinance and meets or otherwise justifies modification of all of its requirements, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If it does, the Commission shall approve the preliminary development plan in principle. If it does not, the Commission shall recommend changes and additions needed for approval and await a resubmission. 
In approving a preliminary development plan in principle, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider: 
(1)  If the proposed development is consistent with the intent and requirements of this Zoning Ordinance; 
(2)  The appropriateness of the proposed land uses with regard to their type, location, amount, and intensity, where not specifically specified in this Zoning Ordinance; 
(3)  The relationships between uses, and between uses and public facilities, streets, and pathways; 
(4)  Adequacy of provisions for traffic and circulation, and the geometry and characteristics of street and pathway systems; 
(5)  Adequacy of yard spaces and uses at the periphery of the development; 
(6)  Adequacy of open spaces and natural preserves and their relationships to land use areas and public accessways; 
(7)  The order, or phases, in which the development will occur and the land uses and quantities to be developed at each phase; 
(8)  Estimates of the time required to complete the development and its various phases; 
(9)  Improvements to be made by the Municipality, if any, and their cost; 
(10)  The community cost of providing public services to the development, and 
(11)  Impacts of the development on surrounding or adjacent areas. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the staging of the planned development to minimize early stage major impacts on the community infrastructure and services systems, and may require the staging of land uses to be generally consistent with the phased development of supporting land uses and public services and facilities. 
The Commission's approval in principle of the preliminary development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final development plan. Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility. 
(h)  Submission of Final Development Plan. 
(1)  After approval in principle of the preliminary development plan, the developer shall submit a final development plan to the Zoning Administrator. The final development plan shall be in general conformance with the preliminary development plan that was approved in principle. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, submission of a final development plan is a formal request for an amendment addition to the zoning of the property in question, and upon final approval by Council becomes the zoning of the property in question in addition to the other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  Copies of the final development plan as specified by the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted and may be endorsed by a qualified professional team which should include an urban planner, licensed architect, registered land surveyor, registered civil engineer, and registered landscape architect. 
(i)  Final Development Plan Application Contents. An application for approval of the final development plan shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner of the property for which planned district development is proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner, attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application for the final development plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if construction on the project has not begun within two years from the date of issuance of the approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain: 
(1)  All of the information required for submission of the preliminary planned district development plan application; 
(2)  All plan materials rendered on an engineering survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions and bearings of property lines, property areas in acres, topography, existing features of the development site including major wooded areas, structures, easements, utility lines, land uses, and maximum building footprint areas for all non-residential uses and residential uses other than single-family detached and two-family dwellings; 
(3)  Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary, water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone, and natural gas installations; waste disposal facilities; street improvements; and the nature and extent of earthwork required for site preparation and development. 
(4)  A detailed landscape plan showing existing and proposed future landscape materials, ground cover, paving patterns and materials. 
(5)  Deed restrictions, protective covenants, and other legal statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the land and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained, and 
(6)  A final development plan fee as established by Ordinance. 
(j)  Public Hearing by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 30 days after submission of a completed application for a final development plan and certification by the Zoning Administrator that the plan application is complete and that to the best of his knowledge the plan meets the requirements of this Ordinance and is in compliance with the preliminary development plan that was approved in principle, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice and public inspection of the application shall be as specified in subsections (e) and (f). 
(k)  Recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 30 days after the Public Hearing on the final development plan the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend that the final development plan be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions, or disapproved, and shall transmit all papers constituting the record and the recommendations to Council. 
Before making its recommendation, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application and presented at the public hearing establish that: 
(1)  The proposed planned district development phase can be initiated within two years of the date of approval and can be completed within five years; 
(2)  The requirements of the Comprehensive Plan relative to the site at issue have been fulfilled; 
(3)  The streets proposed are suitable and adequate to carry the anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the planned district plan area; 
(4)  Proposed non-residential developments can be justified at the location and in the amounts proposed; 
(5)  Housing densities are warranted by amenities and conditions incorporated in the final development plan and are in accordance with these planned district development requirements; 
(6)  Lands to be dedicated to public use are of acceptable and usable size, shape, and location; 
(7)  The area surrounding the development can be planned and zoned in coordination with and in substantial compatibility with the proposed development; 
(8)  The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and uses proposed, and 
(9)  Adequate provision has been made for the detention and channelization of surface drainage runoff. 
(l)  Public Hearing by Council. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the planned district final development plan within a reasonable time. 
(m)  Notice of Public Hearing by Council. 
(1)  Before holding its public hearing, notice of such hearing shall be given on the Municipality of Powell website at least ten days before the hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, the nature and general description and summary of the planned district development, and a statement that all papers relating to the planned district development are on file with the Clerk and are open for public inspection. 
(2)  Written notice of the hearing on the planned district development shall be mailed by the Clerk by first class mail, at least ten days before the date of the public hearing, to all owners of property contiguous to, directly across the street from and within 250 feet of the proposed planned district development and to such others as Council may determine should receive such notice. Notices to individual property owners should contain the same information as required of notices published on the City website. 
(n)  Action by Council. After the public hearing, the Council shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or adopt some modification thereof. In the event Council makes a substantial change to the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, it must do so by a vote of not less than three-fourths (six) of all Members of Council or by approval of a majority of all members of Council (four) and subsequent approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If approved by a majority of Council with a substantial change but by less than three-fourths, such ordinance with proposed substantial change stated separately shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If approved by the Commission, then such ordinance with the substantial change shall take effect. If not approved by the Commission, then at the next scheduled Council meeting, Council shall adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission without the substantial changes or adopt the Commission's recommendations with substantial changes with not less than three-fourths (six) of all members of Council. No such Ordinance shall be passed unless it has been fully and distinctly read on two different days and no Ordinance in accordance with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed to pass or take effect without the concurrence of at least a majority of the full membership of Council. The Council shall be deemed to have rejected the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission when less than a majority of its members (four) vote for its adoption. 
(o)  Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards. In approving any planned district development plan application, both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Ordinance. Any violation of such conditions or safeguards, which have been made a part of the terms under which the final development plan has been approved, shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and shall be punishable as such. 
(p)  Expiration of Approval Period. The approval of a final development plan for a planned district development shall be for a period not to exceed five years to allow for preparation and recording of the required subdivision plat and development of the project. Where a project is completed within five years, the approved final development plan shall remain as the effective zoning control over the area included in the plan, in addition to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. If required plats are not properly recorded and/or if no construction has begun on the site within two years of such approval, the approved final development plan shall be void unless an application for a time extension is submitted and approved, which approval may be withheld for good cause. 
(q)  Extension of Time Limit. An extension of the time limits set in subsection (p) hereof, as a modification of the approved final development plan, may be approved by Council upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such approval shall be granted only upon a finding of a valid purpose and necessity for such extension and evidences of reasonable and diligent efforts toward accomplishment of the original development plan within the originally established time limits, and upon finding that such extension is not in conflict with the general health, welfare and safety of the public or development standards of the district. No extension of time shall be granted except on application filed with the Zoning Administrator not later than 30 days before the expiration of the time limits set in subsection (p) hereof. 
(r)  Amendment or Alteration of Approved Planned District Development Plans. Once a final development plan for a planned district has been approved by Council, all subsequent substantial changes to that plan shall only be permitted by resubmission as a new substitute plan and repatriation of the procedures established in these sections. "Substantial change" for the purposes of this section shall mean any modification of an approved planned district development plan, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, that results in: 
(1)  Any increase in the number, or change in the type and/or mix of residences, and/or non-residential building area or land use; 
(2)  Decrease in the approved minimum lot size, number of parking spaces to be provided, and/or trash storage areas; 
(3)  Change in the approved location of land uses, land use subareas or sub-elements, streets, public or private parklands and other public facilities, and/or natural environmental preserves or scenic easements by more than 30 feet; 
(4)  Reduction in area of public and/or private parklands or other public facilities and/or natural environmental preserves or scenic easements; 
(5)  Alteration of the basic geometry and/or operational characteristics of any element of the approved street pattern, parking facilities, service access, trash storage facilities, and/or system of pedestrian and/or equestrian paths that results in a change in operating characteristics or character; 
(6)  Any circumstance below the minimum requirements established in this Zoning Ordinance or as required in the approval of a conditionally permitted use in a planned district. 
(s)  Subsequent Zoning Amendments Initiated by Other Than Planned District Processes. No zoning amendment passed during the time period granted for the initiation and completion of an approved final development plan shall in any way affect the terms under which the approval of the planned district development was granted. 
(t)  Plat Required. 
(1)  In a Planned District, no use shall be established or changed and no structure shall be constructed or altered until any required subdivision plat has been prepared and recorded in accordance with the Development Regulations. 
(2)  In the event that any public service facilities not to be otherwise guaranteed by a public utility have not been constructed prior to the recording of the plat, the owner of the project shall post a performance bond, or other such alternative form of surety as approved by the City Law Director, in favor of the appropriate public officers in a satisfactory amount assuring the expeditious completion of said facilities within one year after the recording of said plat. In no event, however, shall any zoning certificate be issued for any building or use until such time as the facilities for the phase in which the building or use is located are completed. 
(u)  Administrative Review. All plats, construction drawings, restrictive covenants and other necessary documents shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and to the Council or to their designated technical advisors upon request for administrative review to assure substantial compliance with the final approved development plan. 
(Ord. No. 91-01, 2-5-1991; Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.12 - PLANNED DISTRICTS; TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. 
(a)  A property owner of a parcel of land designated in this Zoning Ordinance as being in a Planned Residence District and allowing a higher residential density than is desired to be utilized may sell this surplus dwelling unit assignment, once officially determined and recorded in the official adoption of an approved planned district development plan, to the next smallest whole number, at market-determined value to owners of property in other-than-single-family residential areas, other-than-single-family residential subareas of, or in planned districts also officially established in this zoning ordinance as additions to the maximum number of dwelling units normally permitted in that district, to a total or no more than 120 percent of the dwelling units otherwise permitted in that district. Sale and transfer of such residential development rights must be approved for both the "sending" and "receiving" areas by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Sale of such surplus dwelling unit rights, as verified by the Zoning Administrator, shall be recorded by the Clerk on the official zoning maps of both the "sending" and "receiving" areas. Such action shall also be recorded in the minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which the transfer is approved. Upon consummation of the sale and approval of the reassignment "receiving" zone and the new total number of dwelling units permitted on the buyer's site in that zone by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the newly transferred development rights may be used by the owner of the "receiving" parcel. 
(b)  The number of surplus dwellings units must be determined and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the "sending" area prior to these dwelling units being included in any plans associated with the "receiving" area. 
(Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 92-01) 
1143.13 - PR-PLANNED RESIDENCE DISTRICT.** 
(a)  Official Schedule of Permitted Uses and Dimensional Requirements. 
PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Single-family residences attached or detached Cemeteries Two-family residences 
Multifamily residences Class I, Type B group residence facilities (5 or less residents) 
Home occupations Apartment residences Roadside sale of agricultural products produced on the premises Cluster homes, patio homes, common wall homes, or any reasonable variation on these themes Parking lots or storage areas for boats and/or recreational vehicles Elderly households Noncommercial kennels and catteries associated with a residence Zero lot line development Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas Churches Accessory buildings and uses Agriculture Country clubs; golf courses Elderly housing facilities Convalescent homes Nursing homes Homes for children and the aged Kindergarten or child day-care facilities Life-care facilities Congregate housing  
** Refer to Section 1143.08(b) for additional information 
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED OR TWO FAMILY ATTACHED HOUSING 
* except where the design goal is to: 1. cluster homes to leave open space or; 2. to vary smaller and larger lots 
GROSS DENSITY 0.70 or less 0.71-1.2 1.21-1.5 1.51-1.7 MIN. STREET 
FRONTAGE (lots) < 3ac 180' 110' 100' 90'  3 < 4 200'  4 < 5 250'  > = 5 300' MIN. DISTANCE BETWEEN BLDGS. 50' 40' 30' 24' MINIMUM SIDE YARDS 1 (a) where bldg on 
adjacent lot is unknown 25' 20' 15' 12' (b) where bldg on 
adjacent lot is known 15' 10' 10' 8' MINIMUM FRONT YARD 40' 30' 30' 30' MINIMUM REAR YARD 40' 30' 30' 30' MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 25% 25% 25% 25% MAXIMUM BLDG HEIGHT (a) principal building 35' 35' 35' 35' (b) accessory building 18' 18' 18' 18' MINIMUM FLOOR AREA (sq. ft.) 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 MINIMUM CHURCH SITE: 3 acres plus one (1) acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area  
1   Except for zero lot line development 
OTHER THAN SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO FAMILY HOUSING 
(not to exceed 9 du/gross acre) 
GROSS DENSITY Not to exceed nine (9) du's per gross acre MIN. STREET FRONTAGE (LOTS) lots < 3 acres 160' 3 but < 4 acres 200' 4 but < 5 acres 250' 5 or more acres 300' MIN. DISTANCE BETWEEN BLDGS. 30' MINIMUM SIDE YARDS 1 (a) where bldg on adjacent lot is 
unknown 40' (b) where bldg on adjacent lot is known 10' MINIMUM FRONT YARD 60' MINIMUM REAR YARD 40' MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 20% MAXIMUM BLDG. HEIGHT (a) principal building 35' and no more than two stories (b) accessory building 18' MINIMUM FLOOR AREA (sq. ft.) 3 bedroom: 1,000 2 bedroom: 800 1 bedroom: 600 Minimum 1,500/building  
(b)  Formula for Determining the Number of Dwelling Units in a Planned Residence District Development Plan. 
(1)  Subject to the other provisions of this subsection (b), the number of dwelling units in a Planned Residence District development plan should be determined by applying the following formula to the gross number of acres of the site to be developed as described in the development plan: 
A.  Base Gross Density   0.70 du/gross acre 
B.  A Density Bonus for provision of parkways as designated in the Comprehensive Plan may, in the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, be granted within the following range: 
Minimum Density Bonus  0.10 du/gross acre 
Maximum Density Bonus  0.50 du/gross acre 
C.  A Density Bonus for dedication or reservation of land to be used for Public uses may, in the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, be granted within the following range: 
Minimum Density Bonus  0.1 du/gross acre 
Maximum Density Bonus  0.50 du/gross acre 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(1)A., the term "Public Uses" shall include, without limitation, public parks, public schools, governmental administrative buildings, police stations, sheriff stations, fire stations, community swimming pools, public bike/walk/jog pathways, and such other facilities or uses as the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Council may from time to time determine to be facilities and/or uses for Public Uses. 
(2)  In order to assist the Planning and Zoning Commission in exercising its discretion to grant a Density Bonus under subsection (b)(1)B. and/or subsection (b)(1)C., the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to prepare and provide to the Planning and Zoning Commission a fiscal impact report containing information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Alternatively, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to pay for a fiscal impact report as may be prepared by the Zoning Administrator of the City or by a third party selected by the Zoning Administrator of the City. 
(3)  If, in connection with any development plan for a Planned Residence District, the applicant includes a tract of land with one or more existing buildings located on such tract of land and the development plan does not contemplate the development of all or any portion of such tract of land by the applicant, then the number of gross acres associated with such tracts of land that is not to be developed by the applicant should not be included in the gross number of acres of the site described in the development plan for purposes of determining the number of dwelling units in the Planned Residence District in accordance with this subsection (b). 
(c)  Redistribution of Dwelling Units on a Planned Residence District Plan. In any Planned Residence district plan, the total number of dwelling units generated by the application of the formula in subsection (b) hereof, may be redistributed within the tract as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(d)  Mobile Homes. Except as specifically permitted herein, no mobile home, or mobile office structure shall be placed or occupied in this district. 
(Ord. No. 92-01; Ord. No. 94-28; Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.14 - PO-PLANNED OFFICE DISTRICT.** 
(a)  Official Schedule of Permitted Uses and Dimensional Requirements. 
PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Professional activities offices Free standing on-premises signs Personal service offices: such as insurance agencies, insurance brokers, real estate, allied medical, dental, and optical offices, investments services Cemeteries Business and professional associations Class I, Type B group residence facilities (5 of less residents) Civic, social and fraternal 
organizations Home occupations General business offices Roadside sale of agricultural products produced on the premises Offices of credit agencies, personal credit institutions, or loan offices Veterinarian's office (small animals) Churches Research offices Community facilities, such as libraries, offices, or educational facilities Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas Single-family residences, attached or detached Two-family residences Multifamily residences Zero lot line development Apartment residences Cluster homes, patio homes, common wall homes or any reasonable variation on these themes Elderly households Elderly housing facilities Life-care facilities Congregate housing Kindergarten or Child day-care Accessory buildings and uses Agriculture Country clubs; golf courses Convalescent homes Nursing homes Homes for children and the aged  
** Refer to Section 1143.08(b) for additional information 
MIN. STREET FRONTAGE: 160 feet MIN. DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS: 50 feet MINIMUM SIDE YARDS: 25 feet* MINIMUM FRONT YARD: 60 feet MINIMUM REAR YARD: 30 feet MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 20% MAXIMUM BLDG HEIGHT: (a) principal bldgs: 35' and no more than two stories. (b) accessory bldgs: 18 feet MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DU 3 BR: 1,000 sq. ft. 
2 BR: 800 sq. ft. 
1BR: 600 sq. ft. 
Min: 1,500 sq. ft. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA: No structure shall contain more than 3,000 sq. ft. of floor area per floor. MAXIMUM BUILDING DIMENSION 150 feet MINIMUM CHURCH SITE: 3 acres plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area.  
(b)  Supplemental Regulations for the Planned Office District. 
(1)  No drive-in or drive-through facilities are permitted in this district. Offices of credit agencies, credit institutions, and loan offices shall not be permitted to have drive-in windows. 
(2)  Veterinarian's offices shall only be permitted if practice is limited to small domestic animals, if no animals are boarded on the premises, and if no outside runs are provided. 
(3)  All non-residential buildings in the planned office district shall follow the guidelines set forth within the City's Pedestrian Scale Design Guidelines, and shall be of natural materials: cement fiber, wood, brick, stone, or rough-split block, with natural slate, wood shingles, asphalt or fiberglass shingles, standing seam copper, or other metal, roofs. 
(4)  All parking areas are to be interior to building groupings, or behind natural three-or-four rail split rail fences, or three-or-four rail white or black board fences, or otherwise hidden by earth mounding, screen walls, or dense shrubbery from sight from adjacent sites and from nearby public roads, and designed and located for minimum impact on adjacent residential areas. 
(5)  All new apartment residence units in a planned office district shall be subservient to the office use of the district and shall be executed in a "village" setting, that is, each such unit shall be attached to, or above, such office uses, and not in independent isolated structures; approval shall be contingent upon adequacy of existing streets and/or completed bypass or parkway routes to accommodate the projected traffic generated by such uses. 
(6)  Except as specifically permitted herein, no mobile home or mobile office structure shall be placed or occupied in this district. 
(7)  All required setbacks facing on Liberty Street, Seldom Seen Road, or any parkway shall be lined as possible in three-or-four rail, white or black board fences, or three-or-four rail natural split-rail fences. 
(Ord. No. 91-40, 2-5-1995; Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.15 - PC-PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.** 
(a)  Official Schedule of Permitted Uses and Dimensional Requirements. 
PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Retail sales Roadside sale of agricultural products produced on the premises Convenience business Free-standing on-premises signs Commercial establishments Cemeteries Office uses Amusement arcades General business Home occupations Office type business Class I, Type B group residence facilities (5 or less residents) Office research centers Motels and hotels of any kind Services business Clubs Personal services Commercial recreation and 
 entertainment facilities Churches Single-family residences, 
 attached or detached Two-family residences Multifamily residences Zero lot line dwellings Apartment residences Cluster homes, patio homes, common wall homes, or any reasonable variation on these themes Elderly households Elderly housing facilities Life-care facilities Congregate housing Convalescent homes Nursing homes Homes for children or the aged Kindergarten or child day-care Agriculture Accessory buildings and uses Community facilities such as libraries, offices, or educational facilities operated by a public agency or government Restaurants Medical, dental office facilities and laboratories Hospitals and clinics Regional health care and retirement centers/communities Country clubs, golf courses Conference facilities Commercial and Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas Automotive, mobile home, travel trailer, and farm implement sales Highway business Auto service stations Automotive repair Plant materials nursery Pet Day Care and adoption facitlities Veterinarian's offices, clinics, hospitals for small animals without kennels  
MIN. STREET FRONTAGE: 160 feet MIN. DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS: 50 feet MINIMUM SIDE YARDS: 25 feet* MINIMUM FRONT YARD: 
(See also Section 1145.27) 60 feet MINIMUM REAR YARD: 30 feet MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 20% MAXIMUM BLDG HEIGHT: (a) principal bldgs: 35' and no more than two (2) stories. (b) accessory bldgs: 18 feet MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
PER DU, 3 BR: 1,000 sq. ft. 
2 BR: 800 sq. ft. 
1 BR: 600 sq. ft. 
Min: 1,500/per building MAXIMUM BUILDING DIMENSION 150 feet MINIMUM CHURCH SITE: 3 acres plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area.  
** Refer to Section 1143.08(b) for additional information 
(b)  Supplemental Regulations for the Planned Commercial District. 
(1)  All apartment uses in a planned commercial district shall be subservient to the commercial use of the district, and shall be executed in a "village" setting, that is, attached to, or above, such commercial uses, and not as independent isolated structures. Approval shall be contingent upon adequacy of existing streets and/or completed bypass or parkway routes to accommodate the projected traffic generated by such uses. 
(2)  No commercial or business activity shall be conducted in a unit designed for residential use without the consent of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  Service areas, loading docks, and off-street parking/waiting stalls for all drive-in or drive-through businesses shall be located at the rear of the primary structure and shall be screened from view from surrounding streets and properties by walls, fences, or shrubbery. 
(4)  Gasoline service stations shall located their service areas, including pumps, in the rear yard area of the site, unless such service areas are effectively screened from view from surrounding public streets and adjacent properties. 
(5)  Outdoor storage and display of merchandise on public sidewalks shall be prohibited unless written application is made to and approval is granted by the Zoning Administrator. 
(6)  Except as specifically permitted herein, no mobile home or mobile office structure shall be placed or occupied in this district. 
(7)  Where non-residential building facades are visible from a residence, residential zone, residential area of a planned district, church site, public and/or private parkland, and/or public road, these facades shall be of natural materials: cement fiber, wood, brick, stone, or rough-split block. 
(8)  All non-residential buildings in the planned commercial district shall follow the guidelines set forth within the City's Pedestrian Scale Design Guidelines, and shall have pitched, gabled, or hipped roofs of natural slate, wood shingles, asphalt or fiberglass shingles or standing seam copper or other metal. 
(9)  All non-residential buildings in the planned commercial district on sites that abut Powell Road west of Sawmill Road and/or Sawmill Parkway, shall be no less than 100 feet apart and shall be setback no less than 200 feet from the centerlines of such roads. No less than 80 percent of the area between buildings along these roads, and between such buildings and these roads' right-of-ways shall be in green lawn, natural woodlands, lakes, farmland or pasture. These areas shall be enclosed in three-or-four rail, white or black board fences, or three-or-four rail natural split-rail fences. 
(10)  All parking areas are to be interior to building groups, or behind three-or-four rail natural split-rail fences, or three-or-four rail, white or black board fences, or otherwise hidden by earth mounding, screen walls, or dense shrubbery from sight from adjacent sites and from nearby public roads, and designed and located for minimum impact on adjacent residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 98-42, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-11, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.16 - PI-PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.** 
(a)  Official Schedule of Permitted Uses and Dimensional Requirements. 
PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Wholesale business Circuses, carnivals or similar transient enterprises Food processing Cemeteries Light manufacturing, processing, 
and assembly Parking lots or storage areas areas for boats and/or recreational vehicles Warehousing and/or distribution Quarries and other activities providing for the removal, processing, and sale of natural resources Maintenance and storage Adult entertainment business Non-personal services Free-standing off-premises signs Professional and trade offices Class I, Type B, and Class II, Types A and B group residence facilities Service and repair activities Class I, Type A group residence facilities Research industry and facilities Indoor and/or outdoor firing ranges for pistol, rifle, or archery Supply yards Storage, manufacturing, processing, repacking, or reloading of explosive ammunition Business offices Freight or trucking terminals Auto service stations Commercial dog/cat kennels Automotive repair establishments Veterinarian's offices, clinics, hospitals for small and large animals with kennels Agriculture Temporary outdoor storage, display, processing, repair, or sale of raw materials, supplies, equipment, or products Churches Self storage facilities and parking lots or storage areas for boats and/or recreational vehicles Manufactured home parks Rental truck facilities ancillary to self storage facilities and parking lots or storage areas for boats and/or recreational vehicles Mobile home parks Plant materials nursery Accessory buildings and uses Country clubs, golf courses Commercial and Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities  
** Refer to Section 1143.08(b) for additional information 
MIN. STREET FRONTAGE: 200 feet MIN. DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS: 100 feet MINIMUM SIDE YARDS: 50 feet MINIMUM FRONT YARD: 60 feet MINIMUM REAR YARD: 30 feet MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 20% MAXIMUM BLDG HEIGHT: (a) principal bldgs: 35' and no more than two stories. (b) accessory bldgs: 18 feet MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER DU 3 BR: 1,000 sq. ft. 2 BR: 800 sq. ft. 1 BR: 600 sq. ft. Min: 1,500/per building MINIMUM CHURCH SITE: 3 acres plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area.  
(b)  Supplementary Regulations for the Planned Industrial District. 
(1)  Free-standing off-premises signs shall only be permitted in those sub-areas of planned industrial districts that have been designated for production industry. 
(2)  No parking, delivery, trash storage, accessory building use, or outdoor storage shall encroach upon a required setback. 
(3)  No circus, carnival or similar transient enterprise shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residence, residential district, or residential sub-area of a planned district. 
(4)  All production, assembly, processing and storage shall occur within enclosed buildings. 
(5)  Except as specifically permitted herein, no mobile home or mobile office structure shall be placed or occupied in this district. 
(6)  Each planned industrial district shall be buffered at its perimeter from adjacent residences, residential zones, residential areas of planned districts, church sites, public and private parkland, and/or public roads with dense planting strips no less than 60 feet deep located on the planned industrial site. 
(7)  Where non-residential building facades are visible from a residence, residential zone, residential area of a planned district, church site, public and/or private parkland, and/or public road, these facades shall be of natural materials: cement fiber, wood, brick, stone, or rough-split block. 
(8)  Excepting via driveway accessways, no parking or delivery area shall be visible from a public street, or from a surrounding area that is not within a planned industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.16.1 - DR-DOWNTOWN RESIDENCE DISTRICT. 
(a)  Purpose. There is hereby created an "DR" ("Downtown Residence") District to preserve, protect, and promote the village-scale residential environment through provision of village-scale housing opportunities on modest lots in the Downtown District. This district shall be reserved for property located within the downtown district overlay district. 
(b)  Unless otherwise noted on the Official Zoning Map and associated materials, the following uses are permitted in the Downtown Residence District: 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached 
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached** 
Dwelling, Two-Family** 
Dwelling, Multi-Family** 
Zero Lot Line Development** 
Elderly Households 
Elderly Housing Units 
Accessory Buildings and Uses 
Public Use Facilities 
Home Occupations 
** These uses are not permitted uses for properties fronting Scioto Street and Case Avenue between Depot Street and North Liberty Street. 
(c)  Unless otherwise noted on the Official Zoning Map and associated materials, the following uses are conditionally permitted in the Downtown Residence District: 
Religious, education, and cultural uses 
Bed and Breakfast Inns 
Child-Day Care 
Class I, Type B Group Residence Facilities (5 or less residents) 
Life Care Facilities 
Elderly Housing Facilities 
Convalescent Home 
Nursing Homes 
Congregate Housing 
Roadside Sale of Agricultural Products Produced on the Premises 
Noncommercial Playgrounds, Playfields, and Picnic Areas 
(d)  Dimensional requirements for single-family dwellings are as follows: 
Minimum Lot Size: 5,000 square feet 
Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet 
(e)  The maximum density is seven dwelling units per acre. The Planning and Zoning Commission can set density bonuses up to an additional two dwelling units per acre for development that includes the expansion and/or creation of public amenities such as streetscape improvements, public gathering spaces, park improvements, and other notable public amenities as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(f)  Principal building setbacks are as follows: 
Front: Minimum 20 feet, maximum 25 feet 
Side: 5 feet 
Rear: 30 feet 
(g)  Accessory building setbacks are as follows: 
Front: 35 feet 
Side: 5 feet 
Rear: 5 feet 
(h)  Additional Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
(2)  Minimum building separation is ten feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height is 35 feet for principal buildings and 23 feet for accessory buildings. 
(4)  Minimum floor area per single-family dwelling unit is 1,500 square feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area per attached dwelling unit is 600 square feet for a one bedroom unit and an additional 200 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
(6)  Whenever possible, parking areas or garages shall enter from rear alleys or drive aisles leading from the principal street and shall lead to parking areas or garages that are placed to the rear of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005) 
1143.16.2 - DB-DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
(a)  Purpose. There is hereby created an "DB" ("Downtown Business") District to preserve, protect, and promote the village-scale central commercial and office environment through promotion of mixed use pursuits developed in a manner that is pleasant, safe, and convenient, the promotion of adaptive reuse of older commercial and office structures, and those constructed originally as residences, for appropriate village-scale commercial and office purposes, retention of the village scale and character through the limitation of uses, the provision for the realization of a fine-grained intermixture of small-scale residential, office, and retail uses that was the hallmark of village life, and minimization of the impact of provisions for auto parking on loss of community character. This district shall be reserved for property located within the downtown district overlay district. 
(b)  Unless otherwise noted on the Official Zoning Map and associated materials, the following uses are permitted in the Downtown Business District: 
Retail Shops 
Office Facilities 
Consumer and Trade Service Facilities 
Convenience Businesses 
Personal Services 
Museums and Galleries 
Zero Lot Line Development 
Accessory Buildings and Uses 
Public Use Facilities 
Religious, education, and cultural uses 
Home Occupations 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached 
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached 
Dwelling, Two-Family 
Dwelling, Multi-Family 
(c)  Unless otherwise noted on the Official Zoning Map and associated materials, the following uses are conditionally permitted in the Downtown Business District: 
Drive-Through Facilities for Permitted Use 
Bed and Breakfast Inns 
Outside Display of Products for Sale in Yard or Parking Areas 
Child-Day Care 
Class I, Type B Group Residence Facilities (5 or less residents) 
Life Care Facilities 
Elderly Housing Facilities 
Convalescent Home 
Nursing Homes 
Congregate Housing 
Veterinarian Offices 
Roadside Sale of Agricultural Products Produced on the Premises 
Commercial and Noncommercial Playgrounds, Playfields, and Picnic Areas 
(d)  Principal building setbacks are as follows: 
Front: Minimum 20 feet, Maximum 25 feet 
Side: 5 feet 
Rear: 5 feet 
(e)  Accessory building setbacks are as follows: 
Front: 35 feet 
Side: 5 feet 
Rear: 5 feet 
(f)  Additional Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage is 20 percent. The Planning and Zoning Commission can set density bonuses up to an additional five percent lot coverage for development that includes the expansion and/or creation of public amenities such as streetscape improvements, public gathering spaces, park improvements, and other notable public amenities as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  Minimum building separation is ten feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height is 35 feet for principal buildings and 23 feet for accessory buildings. 
(4)  The first floor of all structures facing a public street must be occupied by a non-residential use, unless specifically authorized in an approved Final Development Plan. 
(5)  Residential dwellings in this district shall meet the requirements of the DR-Downtown Residence District. 
(6)  The setbacks required for any non-residential use adjacent to existing residential uses shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(g)  Supplemental Regulations. 
(1)  In determining the uses permitted in this district, the following retail uses primarily engaged in the selling of merchandise for personal or household consumption, or uses deemed to be substantially similar, shall be permitted in this district: 
hardware stores grocery stores meat markets seafood markets fruit stores vegetable markets candy stores drug stores proprietary stores liquor stores carry-outs florists music stores antique shops curio stores cloth/yarn shops tea rooms sit-down restaurants book stores laundromats laundry shops dry cleaning shops beauty parlors barber shops photo studios health spas shoe repair shops drinking places gift shops  
(2)  In determining the uses permitted in this district, the following office uses that provide personal services, or uses deemed to be substantially similar, shall be permitted in this district: 
insurance agencies insurance brokers real estate offices law offices physician offices dentist offices osteopath offices chiropractor offices podiatrist offices allied medical office allied dental office optical office accountant office architect office engineer office credit agencies loan offices banks  
(3)  In determining the uses permitted in this district, the following consumer and trade service facilities that commonly provide home and office citizen services, or uses deemed to be substantially similar, shall be permitted "consumer and trade service" uses in this district: 
copy shops letter services box and mail shops gift wrap services  
(4)  Veterinarian's offices shall be conditionally permitted uses in this district provided that the practice is limited to small domestic animals, that no animals are boarded on the premises, and that no outside runs or exercise areas are provided. 
(5)  Child day-care facilities must be architecturally compatible with the neighborhood, and provision must be made for adequate vehicular access and parking during peak pick-up and drop-off periods, and fences must be provided to control the access of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as roads, streets, lakes, creeks, ponds, and to adjacent property. If the adjacent property is residential, the child care facility building must be no less than ten feet from the residential property line. 
(6)  Where this district abuts a residential zone, side and rear yard spaces adjoining the residential zone shall be the same as for that residential zone. 
(7)  The parking provisions set forth in Chapter 1149 shall be met; provided, however, the Planning and Zoning Commission, through an Administrative Review, can consider reductions to those requirements provided it is sufficiently demonstrated through data, applicable standards, and/or other materials and information that the minimum requirement is not necessary, in accordance with subsection (h) below and any other applicable provisions of Chapter 1149. 
(8)  Parking areas shall be located behind principal buildings in manner to minimize the view of the parking area from any public right-of-way. If, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a parking area is not satisfactorily screened from view, additional landscape or other screening may be required. 
(9)  Adequate provision for storm drainage and sanitary sewerage shall be required for the approval of any development or the initiation of a new land use in this district. 
(10)  Except as specifically provided for in this Zoning Ordinance, no mobile home or mobile structure shall be placed or occupied in this district. 
(11)  It is preferred all services and delivery be made to the rear of the structure or use except under unusual conditions for which service can be made to the side or front of the structure. 
(12)  There shall be no overnight display of items for sale that are not normally intended for permanent outdoor use (e.g. upholstered furniture). 
(13)  No commercial or business activity, other than those activities permitted as home occupations, shall be conducted in a unit designed for residential use without consent of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(h)  Parking Regulations. To preclude destruction of the unique village scale and character of the Downtown Business District by the provision of modern large-scale off-street parking facilities and loading spaces, the off-street parking and loading requirements of this Zoning Ordinance are hereby altered as set forth below as they apply to land uses and structures located in the Downtown Business District: 
(1)  Useable on-street curbside parallel parking spaces on streets upon which the relevant property abuts may be counted toward meeting the parking needs of the abutting use. 
(2)  The number of off-street parking spaces required to be provided may be reduced in the Downtown Business District at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission to one-half that required in other districts for the same use. Notwithstanding this provision for uses within the Downtown Business District, those uses that generally require a larger amount of parking for higher capacity turnover business, such as but not limited to restaurants and bars, shall not be reduced in half, but can be planned for some reduction as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as an Administrative Review if allowances are made for parking spaces that can be utilized on adjacent or nearby properties (public or private) that is a reasonable plan for sharing parking spaces. 
(3)  In the Downtown Business District and on properties immediately abutting that district that are separated from the district by an alley, back-out spaces from alleys will be permitted, as parking off of rear alleys in this district is preferable to the provision of parking in more visible locations. 
(4)  No off-street loading spaces shall be required for any use in the Downtown Business District. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.17 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS. 
(a)  General. The following three districts: 
DD - Downtown District Overlay District 
OR - Olentangy River Environmental Overlay District 
AR - Architectural Review Overlay District 
are herein designated as "overlay" districts. These districts are superimposed over other districts; their requirements are accumulative with those of the underlying district in an additive manner. In the event of conflict between the requirements of the overlay zone and those of the zone over which it is superimposed, as related to a location situated in both districts, the more stringent requirement of the two districts shall govern unless specified to the contrary. 
(b)  Overlay Districts; Purpose. It is the purpose of overlay zones to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare through provision for community control of construction, land uses and/or development for a specific purpose that requires imposition of such controls on land areas situated in more than one district, or in specific areas that constitute a sub-area within a single district, where such controls are not generally applicable to the community as a whole or to the entire area in any one zone district. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005) 
1143.18 - DD-DOWNTOWN DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of the Downtown District Overlay District (herein after referred to as the "Downtown District") to promote the public, health, safety, and welfare by providing for the regulation of the downtown area through a single, unified district. This district is created to permit the careful and coordinated physical planning, development, and redevelopment of the land, and to provide flexibility in the location of land uses, housing types, and intensity. This district shall preserve, protect, and promote the historical nature of downtown by pursing development that encourages a mix of uses in a manner that is safe, pleasant, convenient, and in context with the history of the area. It is also the purpose of the Downtown District to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving sites and structures within the historic central core of the City that reflect the City's history and its architectural history. 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values. 
(3)  Strengthen the economy of the City by promoting business development through the allowance of buildings that provide flexible commercial opportunities yet in keeping with the village scale and character. 
(4)  Protect and enhance the City's attractions to residents and visitors. 
(5)  Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, and interest of the City's history. 
(6)  Foster civic pride in the beauty, human scale, and human details of the City's history. 
(7)  Promote excellence in small town design, incorporating elements that are consistent with the existing character of the area. 
(8)  Promote the use and preservation of historic sites and structures for the education and general welfare of the people of the City. 
(9)  Preserve sound existing housing stock in the historic central area of the City and safeguard the residential scale of the district and the character of sub-areas that are primarily residential in character. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of sections of this Zoning Ordinance specifically addressed to the Downtown District, certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows: 
(1)  A.I.A. means the American Institute of Architects. 
(2)  Alter or alteration means any change involving the exterior architectural features, including landscaping, of any property which lies within a Downtown District, not including demolition, removal or new construction. 
(3)  Applicant means any person, persons, association, organization, partnership, units of government, public bodies and corporations who apply for a Certificate of Appropriateness in order to undertake an environmental change within the Downtown District. 
(4)  Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate authorizing any environmental change within the Downtown District. 
(5)  Council means the City Council of the City of Powell. 
(6)  Demolition means the complete or substantial removal or destruction of any structure which is located within the Downtown District. 
(7)  Environmental change means any exterior alteration, demolition, removal or new construction of any property resulting in a visual exterior change to the property subject to the provisions of these sections. 
(8)  Exterior architectural feature means the architectural style, general design and arrangement of the exterior of a structure including, but not limited to, the type, color and texture of the building material, doors, windows, roof, porches and other appurtenant fixtures. 
(9)  Downtown District means the district designated as such in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(10)  Historic downtown advisory commission means the appointed board established to review environmental changes within the Downtown District, having specific powers and duties subject to the provisions of these sections. 
(11)  Planning and zoning commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Powell. 
(12)  Preservation means the process, including maintenance, of treating an existing building to arrest or slow future deterioration, stabilize the structure and provide structural safety without changing or adversely affecting the character of appearance of the structure. 
(13)  Property owner means the owner(s) of record. 
(14)  Rehabilitation or renovation means the modification of or change to an existing building. Rehabilitation extends the useful life or utility of the building through repairs or alterations, sometimes major, while the features of the building that contributed to its architectural, cultural, or historical character are preserved and/or restored. 
(15)  Standards and guidelines means the building construction and building rehabilitation criteria derived from historical and architectural information reflecting that particular Downtown District to be used by the Historic Downtown Commission in considering Certificate of Appropriateness applications. This refers to the "Downtown District Architectural Guidelines" found elsewhere in the Zoning Code. 
(16)  Structure means any building including houses, stores, warehouses, churches, schools, garages, barns, carriage houses, tool sheds, or similar buildings, and also fences, walls, light fixtures, steps, signs, works of art, or other like fixtures or any appurtenances thereto, or any significant landscaping. 
(17)  Zoning administrator means the Zoning Administrator of the City of Powell. 
(c)  Conformance with Existing Laws. Where the existing laws and ordinances are not replaced or modified by these sections the existing laws and ordinances shall remain in effect. In the event of a conflict between these standards and any other standard prescribed in the Planning and Zoning Code, these standards shall apply. 
(d)  Correlation with City Programs. The City shall consider its Capital Improvements Program, land purchases, and other plans in or proximate to the Downtown District, with respect to the purpose and requirements of these sections and shall, whenever feasible, support it and conform thereto. 
(e)  Land Use Review. The City shall notify the Historic Downtown Commission of any activity requiring Planning and Zoning Commission review which is in the Downtown District or 250 feet from its boundary. Notification shall be given to the Historic Downtown Commission no less than ten calendar days before the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing on the matter. 
(f)  Establishment as a Receiving Area for the Transfer of Development Rights. As authorized by Section 1143.12, the Downtown District is hereby established as a receiving area for the transfer of surplus development rights. The transfer of development rights shall meet any requirements and procedures set forth in Section 1143.12. In addition, the transfer of development rights to any property or properties in the downtown district shall only be allowed for those development plans that are considered exemplary plans by the Planning and Zoning Commission in advancing the purposes of the Downtown District, as stated in this section. 
(g)  Downtown District Boundaries. The location and extent of the Downtown District Overlay District shall be as designated on the official Zoning Map of the Municipality of Powell and shall only include those properties zoned DR, Downtown Residence District and DB, Downtown Business District, both of which are planned districts. 
(1)  Proposals to expand, or modify the Downtown District boundaries. 
A.  Initiation. 
1.  Proposals to expand or modify the Downtown District boundaries shall be initiated by resolution of City Council, with referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposals to expand, or modify the Downtown District shall include the following documentation: 
a.  Evidence that the area is of architectural and historic significance. 
b.  A boundary description. 
(2)  Study and hearing. 
A.  General procedures to expand, or modify the Downtown District boundaries shall be in accordance with the required procedures for zone changes as provided in this Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Planning and Zoning Commission report. The Planning and Zoning Commission report to Council shall include information as to how the proposed Downtown District expansion or modification is of special historical and architectural significance. The Planning and Zoning Commission report shall include the following: 
1.  A recommendation from the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. 
2.  Whether the area or buildings in the area are listed on the National Register of Historic Places; 
3.  Whether it provides significant examples of architectural styles of the past; 
4.  A description of the area and structures to serve as an informational resource. The description shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A geographic description including location and its relationship to the entire municipality and current boundaries of the downtown district; 
b.  A description of the general land uses; 
c.  A general description of the building conditions; 
d.  A general description of the socioeconomic characteristics; 
e.  A description of existing developmental plans or programs within or including the area; 
f.  A list of neighborhood organizations within, serving or otherwise interested in the area in question. 
(3)  City Council designation. 
A.  City Council hearing. City Council shall hold public hearings on proposals to expand, or modify the Downtown District. These hearings shall be in the same manner as for any proposed change in the Zoning Map. 
B.  Zoning Map Overlay. The Zoning Administrator shall cause the designation to be shown upon the official Zoning Map of the City of Powell as an Overlay without changing the underlying zoning. Whenever there is a conflict between regulation of the zoning district and the regulations of the Downtown District, the more restrictive shall apply. 
C.  Notification of designation. Upon expansion or modification of the boundaries of the Downtown District, the clerk shall promptly notify the Zoning Administrator, who shall notify all interested of affected property owners, groups, boards and commissions. 
(h)  Development Plan Required. Unless the provisions of this section state otherwise, a development plan shall be required in accordance with the procedures described in the planned district requirements of this zoning code. 
(i)  Establishment of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. The Downtown District is held to have a distinctive nature. In the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare it is considered a public necessity to protect the qualities of the Downtown District and enhance the unique characteristics of this area. 
(1)  There is hereby established a Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. 
(2)  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall be empowered to hear, review, approve, deny, and recommend modifications to proposals for Certificates of Appropriateness involving environmental changes within the district. Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness shall be judged using the adopted Downtown District Architectural Guidelines. 
A.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall establish, within the spirit and purposes of this section, procedures for which the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission will evaluate applications for Certificates of Appropriateness. Such information shall be written and published within three months after the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission members have been appointed and may be revised from time to time. 
B.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall maintain files, available to the public, containing all applications granted or denied to serve as a basis for prospective applicants to conform their plans to established policy. 
C.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission may make recommendations to the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission regarding amendments to these sections and with respect to other legislation affecting the Downtown District. 
D.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall work for the continuing education of both the Downtown District residents and businesses which it serves and the residents of the City as a whole with respect to these sections and the district's historic heritage and architectural significance. In addition, the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission may publish informational literature and hold periodic public meetings to disseminate information on preservation and rehabilitation techniques and resources. 
E.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission may delegate to the Zoning Administrator review authority over certain Environmental Changes on historically and architecturally documented criteria adopted by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall then review, grant, deny and/or recommend modifications in writing for such applications. 
F.  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall serve as the architectural review commission for all areas that fall within the boundaries of the Downtown District. 
(3)  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall have six members appointed by Council. The purpose of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission will be to administer the delegated functions as set forth in this chapter, to provide advice to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, and property owners and developers in the Downtown District, and to oversee new construction, remodeling, rehabilitations, restorations and additions made in the Downtown District. The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission membership shall be as follows: 
A.  One member of the A.I.A. appointed by Council. Council shall appoint a person, whose background, education and/or professional experience is in historic design, preservation, renovation, or rehabilitation, to the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. This member may be a nonresident of the City of Powell. This member shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall not vote. 
B.  Two residents of the City of Powell appointed by Council, one of which must be a resident of the Downtown District. 
C.  One owner of a business located in the Downtown District appointed by Council. This member may be a nonresident of the City of Powell. 
D.  One representative with a professional background or experience in historic design, preservation, restoration, renovation, or construction appointed by Council. This member may be a nonresident of the City of Powell. 
E.  One representative from the Planning and Zoning Commission as appointed by City Council. 
F.  If no citizens have the qualifications set forth above or if in the majority opinion of City Council no individuals are qualified to carry forth the purpose, goals, and objectives of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission as stated in this section are available at the time of appointment, then Council may appoint any resident, property owner, or business owner of the city to fill any of these positions. 
(4)  Members shall serve a three year term. 
(5)  Members of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of City Council. 
(6)  Members shall serve without compensation, except for the A.I.A. representative, who is eligible for compensation as set by Council. 
(7)  A vacancy during the term of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for the original appointment. 
(8)  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson. The Zoning Administrator, or agent, shall provide such staff assistance as is necessary and available. All City departments and agencies shall cooperate in expediting the work of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. 
(9)  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with these sections governing its procedures and transactions. The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall meet as required to carry out the review of applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, and such other related work as may be accepted through request of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Council. Meetings shall be held at least once each month when there are applications to be considered and not less than once every three months. Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairperson of the Historic Downtown Commission. 
(j)  Certificate of Appropriateness Required. No environmental changes shall be made to any property within the Downtown District unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has been previously issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Historic Downtown Advisory Commission, or the Zoning Administrator, when authorized. 
(1)  Applications for a Building Permit, Zoning Certificate, Development Plan, Amendment to Development Plan, or Zoning Amendment, or applications for environmental changes within the Downtown District shall be deemed as applications for Certificates of Appropriateness provided any applicable submittal requirements are met. 
(2)  Any change in the outward appearance of a property within the Downtown District shall require approval of Certificate of Appropriateness by the Planning and Zoning Commission if any change in the outward appearance of a property within the Downtown District results in one or more of the following: 
A.  The plans call for a new non-residential structure or addition of occupyable space to an existing non-residential structure, whether principal or accessory; or 
B.  The plans call for two or more new residential dwelling units; or 
C.  There will be a demolition of a structure larger than 75 square feet in ground floor area; or 
D.  There is a request for rezoning, zoning variance, or subdivision of land within the Downtown District. 
(3)  Any change in the outward appearance of a property within the Downtown District shall require approval of Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission if any change in the outward appearance of a property within the Downtown District results in one or more of the following: 
A.  The plans call for not more than one new residential dwelling unit or addition of occupyable space to an existing residential structure; or 
B.  There will be any changes which affect the outward appearance of a structure, such as installation of different windows, or the construction or reconstruction, including replacement, of such architectural elements as, for example, porches or chimneys; or 
C.  There will be repairs that might change the outside appearance of a building, such as foundations, walls, porches, roofs or chimneys where the original materials are not matched; or 
D.  There will be any change in the outward appearance of a structure or property, not otherwise described in these sections, requiring a Zoning Certificate or Building Permit. 
(4)  External color and/or material changes relative to any structure in the Downtown District shall require approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. 
A.  If the proposed colors and/or materials are approved colors and/or materials included in the adopted standards and guidelines, the color and/or materials may be approved directly by the Zoning Administrator if this is the only change proposed. 
B.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed colors and/or materials are not the existing colors and/or materials and do not match those of the approved standards and guidelines, the change must be submitted to the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission for review. 
(5)  Landscape changes, signs, lighting fixtures, etc. inconsistent with those indicated in the adopted standards and guidelines must be submitted for approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. Those that are so consistent, including landscape changes within rights-of-ways, may be approved directly by the Zoning Administrator. 
(6)  Changes that do not require review and approval include: 
A.  Changes that do not change the exterior appearance of a property, such as repainting a house in the exact same colors or replacing windows with exact duplicates, provided such changes are in conformance with the adopted standards and guidelines; 
B.  Repairs that do not alter the outside appearance of a property such as repairing foundations, walls, porches, roofs, chimneys or downspouts with original materials in original colors; 
C.  Interior changes to a structure, such as plumbing, or electrical repairs, or other interior remodeling as long as these changes do not affect the outside appearance of the structure; 
D.  Flowers and annuals anywhere, and trees and shrubs beyond rights-of-way, do not need to be reviewed and do not need approvals. 
(7)  Upon receipt of all pertinent documents, the Zoning Administrator: 
A.  Shall inform the applicant of the review procedures and application requirements; 
B.  Shall have the authority to request from the applicant additional pertinent information regarding the proposed environmental change, including architectural drawings and detailed drawings of significant architectural features and details at a proper and legible scale, as well as sample materials and color chips; 
C.  Shall inform applicants having applications requiring Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Historic Downtown Advisory Commission review of the date(s) on which the application will be heard; and 
D.  Shall inform the Planning and Zoning Commission and Historic Downtown Advisory Commission of the Certificate of Appropriateness applications. 
(k)  Certificate of Appropriateness Hearing Procedures. 
(1)  A Development Plan, amendment to a Development Plan, or Zoning Amendment approval or denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be considered the same for a Certificate of Appropriateness. Any Certificate of Appropriateness being reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall follow the requirements of a planned district. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may ask the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission to review a Certificate of Appropriateness application with city staff and provide written comments and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. Such recommendations shall be part of the Planning and Zoning Commission approval unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds the recommendations do not correspond to the adopted standards and guidelines or approval process as required by the zoning code. For any recommendation by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission found to not correspond to the adopted standards and guidelines or approval process as required by the zoning code, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a written reason for such finding. Should the Historic District Advisory Commission not provide written comments and recommendations for any application, for any reason, it shall not prohibit the Planning and Zoning Commission from acting upon any application. 
(3)  A hearing on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, as defined in Sections shall be conducted at the next regularly scheduled Historic Downtown Advisory Commission meeting, no later than 45 days after the filing of the application. The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission chairperson may call special meetings with the applicant for consultation at their own discretion or at the request of the Zoning Administrator or the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the regularly scheduled Historic Downtown Advisory Commission meeting. 
(4)  At the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission's discretion, a maximum of one deferral not to exceed 45 days beyond the originally scheduled hearing date may be granted. 
(5)  The chairperson shall conduct meetings of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission and a record of minutes shall be kept and maintained as a permanent record. The minutes of meetings shall be a public record. 
(6)  The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall post the agenda in a manner consistent with other city boards, commissions, and city council. Other owners, residents, and neighborhood organizations may be notified as determined by the Historic District Advisory Commission or Zoning Administrator to carry out the intent of these sections. 
(7)  The majority of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission members shall constitute a quorum. For the taking of official action, a majority vote of the quorum shall be required. 
(8)  In ruling upon an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall consider the following: 
A.  The adherence of the environmental change to the district's adopted standards and guidelines, as well as other requirements established in these sections, and 
B.  The effect of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission's decision upon the applicant. 
(9)  At the hearing, the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall issue an oral decision followed by a written decision within 45 days after the date of the hearing, setting forth, with specificity, its findings and analysis. In the event that no action is taken within 45 days, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for action at their next scheduled meeting. 
(10)  Unless the work described in the Certificate of Appropriateness is commenced within one year and continued progress is made and is completed within two years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall expire as a matter of law. The Historic Downtown Advisory Commission may grant an extension of time for good cause shown. 
(l)  Demolition Hearing Procedures. 
(1)  A Certificate of Appropriateness is not required for the demolition of structures less than 75 square feet in area unless determined to be of historical value by the Zoning Administrator. A written request for demolition with supporting documentation and all other applicable permits are required. 
(2)  In cases where an applicant applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness to demolish a structure within the Downtown District, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the demolition and issue a Certificate of Appropriateness following the procedures stated in Section 1143.18(k)(2) when: 
A.  At a minimum, a Sketch Plan showing possible future redevelopment of the property is reviewed and found generally reasonable by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission; and it is determined that one or both of the following conditions prevail: 
1.  That the structure contains no features of architectural and/or historic significance; 
2.  That there exists no reasonable economic use for the structure as it exists or as it might be restored, and that there exists no feasible and prudent alternative to demolition, or that deterioration has progressed to the point where it is not economically feasible to restore the structure as demonstrated by the applicant through supporting documents such as cost analyses, structural reports, and/or other necessary documents. 
(3)  Every effort shall be made to reuse existing structures through adaptive reuse and to restore their historic character. Under no condition shall a structure that is able to be rehabbed be demolished for an off-street parking facility or loading space. Where structures must be removed, they shall be replaced with buildings of historic character and qualities of the District. 
(m)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decisions by the Zoning Administrator related to the approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness may be appealed by any interested party to the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. Written notice of appeal shall be made within seven days of the decision. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission. A majority vote of the members of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission shall be required to overturn a decision of the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Decisions by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission may be appealed by any interested party to the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing within seven days of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission hearing. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider an appeal within 45 days of receipt and shall utilize the written findings of the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission to present historic, architectural, and aesthetic features of such structure, the nature and character of the surrounding area, the use of such structure and its importance to the City. A majority vote of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required to overturn a decision of the Historic Downtown Commission. 
(4)  No building permit or other permit required for the activity applied for shall be issued during the seven day period or while an appeal is pending. 
(n)  Exclusions. 
(1)  Nothing in these sections shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of any property that does not involve a change in design, material, or other appearance thereof covered by the Historic Downtown Advisory Commission's adopted standards and guidelines. 
(2)  Nothing in these sections shall be construed to prevent authorized Municipal officers from abating public nuisances. 
(o)  Downtown District General Requirements. 
(1)  Standards for Rehabilitation. These "Standards for Rehabilitation" are adopted and shall be complied with within the Downtown District in addition to other standards and guidelines that may be adopted: 
A.  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
B.  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
C.  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken. 
D.  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
E.  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved. 
F.  Distinctive historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
G.  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
H.  Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
I.  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction may not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
J.  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(2)  A primary component of this district shall be landscaping features which minimize potential negative impact of this district's uses on abutting suburban style residential areas. 
A.  A minimum 50 feet wide dedicated buffer zone should be provided within the Downtown District along the west boundary line of the Bartholomew Run residential subdivision. This buffer zone will be dedicated at the time of the construction of a building within this district or the change of use from a single family dwelling to a different permitted use. This buffer zone should be subject to a tree planting program encouraging planting of a mixture of year round vegetation, such as evergreens, and trees of an especially aesthetically pleasing nature in regard to autumn colors selected from the City's approved list of trees. 
B.  This buffer zone shall be a part of a 75 feet "No Structure Zone" for new commercial and non-single-family structures and a 60 feet "No Structure Zone" for a single-family structure converted to a commercial structure with a 60 feet "No Parking Zone." 
C.  The existing private school use at 284 South Liberty Street will not be subject to the landscaping requirements stated above, but will be subject to the approved Final Development Plan and future approved Development Plans to be submitted for future phases of the school use. However, should this use change, or if the school ceases to be a going concern, the buffer zone/landscaping requirements above shall be fully implemented based on future development. 
D.  Any new single-family dwelling proposed on a parcel affected by the buffer zone shall be exempt from the requirements of the buffer zone provided no more than one single-family dwelling is proposed on that parcel and no lot split is required. All structures shall meet the setback requirements of the principal structure. 
(3)  When a non-residential use, including when an existing residential property is changed to a non-residential use is adjacent to any residential property, a 25 feet side yard (except in cases of zero lot line development) and rear yard buffer zone shall be incorporated which requires the planting of a mixture of year round vegetation, such as evergreens, and trees of an especially aesthetically pleasing nature in regard to autumn colors selected from the approved list of trees. Said plantings must have minimum year round opaqueness of 75 percent. This buffer zone is required only along the common property line of the other residential use and only as long as the adjacent lot is being used as a residential use. 
(4)  A mix of non-residential and residential uses is encouraged were permissible by the underlying zoning district, including within the same building. First floor non-residential uses are highly encouraged for any structure fronting Olentangy and Liberty Streets. 
(5)  Whenever possible, drive aisles from public streets shall be shared. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.29 - OR-OLENTANGY RIVER ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
    There is hereby created in the Municipality of Powell an "OR" District ("Olentangy River Environmental Overlay District") to preserve, protect, and promote the natural qualities and characteristics of the land areas adjacent to the Olentangy River, to restrict development of the surrounding lands in recognition of both the vital role played by the riverside environment in the creation and preservation of area land values, and the limited traffic capacity of Route 315, a scenic roadway running at the west side of the river which cannot be substantially widened beyond its current pavement width without a negative effect on the environmental qualities of the river valley. 
(a)  Delineation of the District. 
(1)  The OR-Olentangy River Environmental Overlay District shall include all that land within the Municipality of Powell that is located south of Jewett Road and within one mile, horizontal measure, of the eastern boundary of Liberty Township, and all that land in the Municipality of Powell that is located to the north of Jewett Road and within one and one-half miles, horizontal measure, of the eastern boundary of Liberty Township. 
(2)  The OR-Olentangy River Environmental Overlay District shall also include all property within the Municipality of Powell, no matter where it is located, wherein the only street access requires travel on Olentangy River Road (Route 315), and all property within the Municipality of Powell where the road-pattern travel distance from the property to the Powell Road/Olentangy River Bridge, the Orange Road/Olentangy River Bridge, the crossing of Route 315 at the Franklin County line, the crossing of South Liberty Street and the Franklin County line, or the crossing of Sawmill Road at the Franklin County line is shorter and more direct by using Route 315 as a part of the travel path than it is without travel on Route 315. 
(b)  District Requirements. In addition to those requirements established in the base district or districts over which this zone is superimposed, the following restrictions shall apply to all land located in this overlay zone: 
(1)  The maximum residential development permitted in the district shall be at a density of .85 dwelling units per gross site acre, and/or a minimum site area per residence of one acre. 
(2)  The land uses permitted, conditional uses permitted, and dimensional requirements for development in this zone shall be the same as those established in Section 1143.04 for the R-Residence District unless more stringent requirements are established in this section or in the zone over which this zone is superimposed. 
(3)  New properties plated or developed with access frontage onto Route 315 shall have a minimum property frontage on Route 315 of no less than 250 feet and shall have no more than one curb cut per property. When land is subdivided abutting Route 315, no more than one new curb cut or new access street shall be permitted on Route 315 per subdivision or development, and shall be located no less than 250 feet from another curb cut or street intersection on the same side of the street. 
(4)  No construction of any kind and/or the removal of natural vegetation shall be permitted in the area abutting the Olentangy River within the Municipality of Powell that is located within 120 feet of a riverbank. 
(5)  No construction of any kind and/or the removal of natural vegetation shall be permitted in the area abutting Route 315 within the Municipality of Powell that is located within 40 feet of the right-of-way of Route 315, at both sides of Route 315, excepting new driveways which shall be permitted in cleared zones no wider than 20 feet. 
(6)  No construction of any kind and/or the removal of natural vegetation shall be permitted in the regional flood plain of the Olentangy River or any of its tributaries. 
(7)  The wooded ravines and small valleys bordering the minor drainageways that flow into the Olentangy River shall be preserved in their natural state and shall be designated as natural environmental preserve easements on private land, or as wilderness or natural preserve districts if dedicated to public use, in all future developments. No natural vegetation shall be removed from such areas; they shall remain in their natural state, except for equestrian paths or pedestrian/jogging/bicycle paths of a public or public access nature passing through them or by them, when same are provided as a part of an approved Planned District plan for development and are carefully sited to permit maximum appreciation of the natural beauty of these areas while inflicting a minimum impact on them. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1143.30 - AR-ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
    An Architectural Review Overlay District is hereby established to conserve the value of buildings in the district, assure architectural suitability, prevent depreciation or property values by discordant additions to the environment, and protect the economic and social welfare of the Municipality of Powell by requiring reasonable controls over the character, design, placement and relationship of the buildings, structures and spaces of commercial, office, industrial and warehouse areas, and of multifamily residential areas, while enhancing and protecting the residential land uses which abut such areas through their proper development and environmental character. 
(a)  Delineation of the District. The AR-Architectural Review Overlay District shall include all that land within the Municipality of Powell that is located within any planned district, the Old Powell Commercial District, and it shall also include multifamily residential areas wherever they may be located. 
(b)  Architectural Review Board. The Municipality of Powell Planning and Zoning Commission shall sit as the Powell Architectural Review Board, and for the purposes of this Section shall be referred to as the "Board". A registered architect and a registered landscape architect shall be selected by the Board by a majority vote to serve as advisors to the Board. 
(c)  Architectural Review Board Authorities. No commercial, office, industrial, warehouse, or multifamily residential building, structure, or space within the Powell Architectural Review Overlay District shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved, extended, demolished, raised, enlarged or changed in external appearance, unless and until the plans and specifications of such building or structure and the landscaping plan for the premises on which it is to be located have been approved by the Board. The Board, in reviewing such plans and specifications shall examine the architectural design, the exterior surface treatment, the arrangement of buildings and structures on the premises, the uses of signage, the means of integrating parking, the use of landscape materials and the impact of the proposed project on the surrounding properties to determine the effect the project will have upon the appearance and environment of the district. The Board shall endeavor to assure that the exterior appearance and environment of such buildings, structures and spaces will: 
(1)  Enhance the attractiveness and desirability of the district in keeping with its purpose and intent. 
(2)  Encourage the orderly and harmonious development of the district in keeping with the character of the district. 
(3)  Improve residential amenities in any adjoining residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Enhance and protect the public and private investment and the value of all lands and improvements within the district and adjoining districts. 
(d)  Certificate of Appropriateness Required. 
(1)  A Certificate of Appropriateness must be obtained prior to any new construction, restoration, addition, renovation, demolition and replacement as defined below or other change which would come within the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
A.  New construction. Construction of a new structure. 
B.  Restoration. Major structural reconstruction to restore a building to its original state. 
C.  Additions. Enlargement of an existing structure. 
D.  Renovation. To restore a building to its original state and improve the structure (same as rehabilitate). 
E.  Demolition. Removal of an existing structure. 
F.  Replacement. Changes to an existing structure resulting in different materials and/or architectural styles. 
G.  Reconstruction. Changes which restore an existing structure to its original state. 
H.  Repairs. Minor reconstruction to restore a building to its original state. 
(2)  The Architectural Review Board and its advisors shall, within 120 days after initiation of this role, and subject to Council approval, develop and adopt appropriate standards and guidelines reflecting the community character, similar to those included in the Historic District, in Section 1143.21(c)(1)-(11). 
(3)  The responsibility of review and approval or denial of the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness based upon the standards and guidelines established by the Board and approved by Council shall rest with the Board. 
(4)  Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness shall be made to the Zoning Administrator at least ten days before a regularly scheduled Board meeting. The applicant shall submit with the application drawings, materials, sketches, and other such items that indicate or identify the proposed exterior and environment of any new or existing building or structure within the Architectural Review Overlay District. 
(5)  The Board shall review and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove such applications within 45 days of the meeting. Upon approval by the Board, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness to the applicant within 15 days thereafter. The Certificate of Appropriateness shall remain valid for the period of time designated in the Certificate. Upon disapproval by the Board, the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a Zoning Certificate for such project. 
(6)  Any applicant may appeal the decision of the Board to the Council by filing a notice of appeal to the Clerk within 14 days after the decision of the Board is rendered. The decision of the Council shall be final. 
(e)  Architectural Review in Areas within the Historic District Overlay District. The Architectural Review function in those areas located within the Historic District Overlay District shall be fulfilled by the Historic District Commission through the processes specified in Section 1143.18. A separate architectural review by the Architectural Review Board shall not be required. 
(f)  Enforcement. In the event that any exterior change is made for any structure or building which is located within the Powell Architectural Review Overlay District, or in the event that any construction occurs within the district in violation of the provisions of this section, the City may institute appropriate proceedings to enjoin such unlawful change or construction. 
(Ord. No. 92-01) 
1143.31 - PLANNED RESIDENCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT (PRC). 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the Planned Residential Conservation District (PRC) is to offer an alternative land use type to residential sprawl. Conservation Development balances development pressures with goals of preserving open space and responding to market demands for alternative types of neighborhoods. Conservation Development is designed to work with the natural landscape, clustering homes together into neighborhoods and preserving large amounts of open space. At least half of the overall development should be preserved to create an interconnected greenway system. 
Furthermore, the PRC is meant to promote and preserve rural character and the general public welfare, encourage the efficient use of land and resources, promote greater efficiency in public utility services, and encourage innovation in the planning and building of all types of development. 
(b)  General Criteria for PRC District. 
(1)  Conservation developments are master planned and designed to preserve significant amounts of open space. 
(2)  These communities are likely to be entirely residential, but may incorporate mixed use and, where supported by the market, commercial development at major intersections. 
(3)  Local streets should be designed to encourage interconnectivity to and through the neighborhood. 
(4)  Cul-de-sacs should be discouraged unless necessary due to topographic or environmental constraints. 
(5)  Multi-use paths should be provided throughout conservation communities. 
(6)  Sites should incorporate large scenic landscape setbacks from existing rural roadways. 
(7)  Residential buildings should be clustered together and oriented in a manner that encourages community interaction among residents. 
(8)  At least 50 percent of the overall site area should be preserved. 
(9)  A typical development of 50 acres or larger is required for development within the PRC district. Smaller lots will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
(10)  Open spaces within Conservation Developments should emphasize interconnected greenway systems and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(11)  Residential buildings may take a variety of forms, but traditional Midwestern vernacular is encouraged. 
(c)  Official Schedule of Permitted Uses: 
USES PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Single-family residences attached or detached Cemeteries Two-family residences Class I, Type B group residence facilities (Five or less residents) Multifamily residences Roadside sale of agricultural products produced on the premises Apartment residences Noncommercial kennels and catteries associated with a residence Cluster homes, patio homes common wall homes, or any reasonable variation on these themes Noncommercial playgrounds, playfields, and picnic areas Elderly households Country clubs; golf courses Zero lot line development Convenience Business Churches Accessory buildings and uses Agriculture Elderly housing facilities Convalescent homes Nursing homes Homes for children and the aged Kindergarten or child day-care facilities Life-care facilities Congregate housing Accessory buildings and uses Home occupations COMMON OPEN SPACE* PERMITTED USES: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: Active open space Telecommunications Towers  Agriculture, farming and the like, which may include the use/housing of farm animals.  Bocce, baseball, basketball, softball, football, volleyball, badminton, golf, soccer, swimming, tennis, roller skating, rollerblading, skateboarding, Frisbee, bird watching, horseshoes, canoeing, rowing, jogging, walking, gardening, fishing, and bicycling. Passive open space  Parks, trails, public green space.  
* All open space lands shall be permanently owned by the Homeowners Association or Developer until a Homeowners Association is established. Otherwise, the City may, at its discretion, require dedication to the City if the plan meets its criteria for needed community land. 
(d)  Official Schedule of Prohibited Uses. 
PROHIBITED USES 
Junkyards. 
No trailer of any type, no boats, no campers, and no equipment of any type shall be parked in front of the front building line on any parcel within this district. If a dwelling is located on said lot, the building line shall be considered to be the front wall of the dwelling even if said dwelling is located behind the minimum building line established by this Resolution or the restrictions of the Plat or Subdivision. 
No mobile home, motor home, camper, or manufactured home of any type shall be placed or occupied in the district. 
Storage or accumulation of: inoperable, unused, or unlicensed vehicles; equipment or machinery of any type; and vehicle, equipment, or machinery parts and other similar debris - unless any of the previously mentioned items remain entirely enclosed within a permitted accessory building so as to not be visible from any adjoining property or road. 
The storage or accumulation of trash, debris, graffiti, unused property or discarded materials (including, without limitation, discarded household goods, discarded commercial products, discarded building materials, discarded industrial by-products, and similar materials) shall be deemed a nuisance to the neighborhood and general public per se, and shall be prohibited on any parcel or lot or portion thereof, or on any public or private streets, or common access driveway (as defined by the Delaware County Subdivision Regulations). This excludes trash, garbage, refuse, and debris that is completely enclosed within an appropriate container and placed at an assigned location not more than 24 hours before its regularly scheduled pick-up. 
Landing fields for aircraft, hot air balloons, ultra-light aircraft, and other mechanical flying equipment on any portion of the property. 
Commercial Kennels and Catteries. 
Harboring wild, dangerous, or undomesticated animals. For the purposes of this provision, a "wild, dangerous, or undomesticated animal" shall be defined as follows: An animal whose natural habitat is the wilderness and which, when maintained in human society, is usually confined to a zoological park or exotic animal farm; A poisonous or venomous animal, insect, or arachnid; An unrestrained animal (excluding farm animals) which, by reason of its size, strength, or appetite, could cause peril to children, adults, pets or domesticated animals, buildings, landscaping, or personal property; An animal which is defined as "vicious" or "dangerous" pursuant to the provisions of O.R.C. Chapter 955, as the same may be amended from time to time, or prohibited by any federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance. 
No land or building shall be occupied or used in any manner which creates or contributes to the existence of conditions which are dangerous, injurious, harmful, noxious, or objectionable, or which otherwise adversely affect surrounding areas or adjoining premises beyond what is considered an acceptable farm practice as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Official Dimensional Requirements. 
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED OR TWO FAMILY ATTACHED HOUSING 
* except where the design goal is to: 1) cluster homes to leave open space or; 
2) to vary smaller and larger lots 
Gross Density .70 or less .71-1.2 1.21-1.5 1.51-1.7 Min. Street Frontage (lots) < 3ac 180' 110' 100' 90' 3 < 4 200' 4 < 5 250' > = 5 300' Min. Distance Between Bldgs. 50' 40' 30' 24' Minimum Side Yards 1 1 Except for zero lot line development (a) where bldg on adjacent lot is unknown 25' 20' 15' 12' (b) where bldg on adjacent lot is known 15' 10' 10' 8' Minimum Front Yard 40' 30' 30' 30' Minimum Rear Yard 40' 30' 30' 30' Maximum Lot Coverage 25% 25% 25% 25% Maximum Bldg Height (a) principal building 35' 35' 35' 35' (b) accessory building 18' 18' 18' 18' Minimum Floor Area (sq. ft.) 1500 1500 1500 1500 Minimum Church Site: 5 acres plus one acre for each 100 permanent seats over 300 in the main assembly area  
1 Except for zero lot line development 
OTHER THAN SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO FAMILY HOUSING 
Gross Density Not to exceed nine du's per gross acre Min. Street Frontage (Lots) lots < 3 acres 160' 3 but < 4 acres 200' 4 but < 5 acres 250' 5 or more acres 300' Min. Distance Between Bldgs. 30' Minimum Side Yards 1 Except zero lot line development (a) where bldg on adjacent lot is unknown 40' (b) where bldg on adjacent lot is known 10 Minimum Front Yard 60' Minimum Rear Yard 40' Maximum Lot Coverage 20 percent Maximum Bldg. Height (a) principal building 35' and no more than two stories (b) accessory building 18' Minimum Floor Area (sq. ft.) 3 bedroom: 1000 2 bedroom: 800 1 bedroom: 600 Minimum 1500/building  
NOTE: For all residential uses there shall be no more than four dwelling units attached side-by-side, and a total of no more than eight dwelling units in any one structure. 
1 Except for zero lot line development. 
(f)  Formula for Determining the Number of Dwelling Units in a Planned Residence District Development Plan. 
(1)  Subject to the other provisions of this subsection (b), the number of dwelling units in a Planned Residence District development plan should be determined by applying the following formula to the gross number of acres of the site to be developed as described in the development plan: 
A.  Base Gross Density: 0.70 du/gross acre 
B.  Density Bonus: 
Minimum Density Bonus: 0.1 du/gross acre 
Maximum Density Bonus: 1.0 du/gross acre 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(1)A., the term "Public Uses" shall include, without limitation, major roads & streets, public parks, public schools, governmental administrative buildings, police stations, sheriff stations, fire stations, community swimming pools, public bike/walk/jog pathways, and such other facilities or uses as the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Council may from time to time determine to be facilities and/or uses for Public Uses. 
(2)  In order to assist the Planning and Zoning Commission in exercising its discretion to grant a Density Bonus under subsection (b)(1)B., the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to prepare and provide to the Planning and Zoning Commission a fiscal impact report containing information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Alternatively, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to pay for a fiscal impact report as may be prepared by the Zoning Administrator of the City of Powell or by a third party selected by the Zoning Administrator of the City of Powell. 
(3)  If, in connection with any development plan for a Planned Residence District, the applicant includes a tract of land with one or more existing buildings located on such tract of land and the development plan does not contemplate the development of all or any portion of such tract of land by the applicant, then the number of gross acres associated with such tracts of land that is not to be developed by the applicant should not be included in the gross number of acres of the site described in the development plan for purposes of determining the number of dwelling units in the Planned Residence District in accordance with this subsection (b). 
(g)  Redistribution of Dwelling Units on a Planned Residence District Plan. In any Planned Residence district plan, the total number of dwelling units generated by the application of the formula in subsection (b) hereof, may be redistributed within the tract as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(h)  Design Standards. A Planned Residence Conservation District subdivision is a compact residential neighborhood with 50 percent or more Open Space developed and designed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Access: Frontage on and direct access to one or more dedicated or improved public roads is required. Provisions for future connections to other public roads may be required by the City, Delaware County Engineer, and/or the Delaware County Regional Planning Commission. 
(2)  Density: 
A.  Developments shall have minimum lot sizes, as specified in the City of Powell Comprehensive Plan, as of the date an Application is filed; however, to encourage the efficient use of land and resources, to promote greater efficiency in providing public and utility services, and to encourage innovation and preservation of natural resources and features in planning and building, the City may consider exceptions to the minimum lot sizes prescribed in the City of Powell Comprehensive Plan to allow clustering of dwelling units where appropriate. 
(3)  Building Design: In order to reduce visual impact, builders shall avoid new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges. Front dwelling units shall be placed on internal roads only, not along external roads. Plan dwelling layouts should uphold the visual scenic view shed. Eighty-five percent or more of the total number of dwelling units are to have a direct view of common open space. 
(4)  Building Height Limits: No building in this district shall exceed 40 feet in height. All other freestanding structures including, but not limited to, flagpoles shall not exceed 48 feet in height. All attached structures including, but not limited to, chimneys and church spires shall not top at a height that is eight feet greater than either the height of the building or other structure to which it is attached. 
(5)  Open space: At least 50 percent of the total gross acreage of the Planned Residence Conservation District must be devoted to open space. Open Space shall be designated upon the Development Plan as "Common Open Space," "Open Space" and/or "Natural Green Space" upon the basis of the definitions, purposes, requirements and conditions set forth in Section 4.01 of this Zoning Resolution. Such open space shall be designed to provide active recreation, passive recreation, the preservation of natural site amenities, or any combination thereof. Any buildings, structures, and improvements to the open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the open space, with regard to its topography and unimproved condition. The open space shall be of a size, shape, and location which is conducive to use by all residents of property. Right-of-ways for water courses and other similar channels are not acceptable as open space dedication, unless such land(s) or Easement(s) is usable as a Trail or has been approved by the Zoning Commission. Storm water retention or detention facilities and land under high-voltage power line easements are acceptable as open space, provided such facilities do not exceed 15 percent of the total open space required. 
The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer in writing within the Development Plan. The required amount of common open space reserved in a Planned Residence Conservation District shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area, for the use of each person who buys or leases property within the development, or be dedicated to a homeowners' association that shall have title to the land. Such open space shall be used only for the purposes for which it is designated within the approved Development Plan, and in accordance with the approved Development Plan. The legal articles relating to the organization of the homeowners' association are subject to review and approval by the Zoning Commission. Such legal articles are required to be submitted as part of the Development Plan and shall provide adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of all common areas. Such legal articles shall be inserted into the chain of title of the land within the Planned Residence District. 
(6)  Walkways: Walkways shall be required to connect all residential and non-residential areas and may be required to connect to and throughout the open space. Walkways shall be separated from the paved street surface by at least ten feet of landscaped or grassed areas. 
(7)  Street trees are required and shall conform to adopted City standards. 
(8)  Bikeways/Bike Paths: Bikeways shall be provided in accordance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan. In addition, bikeways within new developments shall be provided in order to connect with existing or planned bikeways external to the proposed new development. 
(9)  Landscaping: Landscaping and/or vegetation shall be permitted in common areas with native trees and shrubs. Shade trees may be placed along internal roads. 
(10)  Screening: All industrial areas adjacent to residential areas shall provide a screening of shrubbery and/or fencing so as to hide trash collection areas and service areas from the view of adjacent residential areas. All such shrubbery shall be properly trimmed and all screening shall be maintained in a neat and tidy manner. 
(11)  Buffering: Natural foliage shall be retained where practicable. Where adequate foliage does not exist, the City may require establishment of such tree cover or other foliage as may be necessary to achieve the purpose of the open space and the buffer of adjacent uses. 
(12)  Preservation Areas: Wetlands, steep (over 20 percent) inclined) slopes, and ravines shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible and shall be delineated on the Development Plan. Secondary conservation areas including historical, archaeological, and/or cultural features shall also be delineated on the plan and preserved as much as practicable. No building or structure shall be placed or constructed in any Preservation Area. Applicants are encouraged to retain or replant native vegetation adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, preserve scenic views and vistas, and preserve existing hedge and tree lines to the extent practicable. 
Applicants are also encouraged to grant conservation easements to an outside party such as the Delaware County Soil and Water Conservancy District, the Nature Conservancy, Ohio Department of Natural Resources (ODNR) or other non-profit, conservation land trust or governmental agency, rather than to developer or a homeowners association, so that the easement(s) can be appropriately monitored and maintained. 
(13)  Floodplain: No principal structures shall be constructed within the 100-year floodplain of any stream or river. 
(14)  Power Lines: Land underneath overhead high-voltage electric transmission lines may be used for open space, landscaping, parking, driveways, and roads with the permission of the applicable utility company. 
(15)  Utilities: All utilities constructed to service the proposed use shall be located underground. Centralized water supply and sanitary sewer disposal systems shall be provided subject to Delaware County Sanitary Engineer, Delaware General Health District, and Ohio Environmental Protection Agency approval. 
(16)  Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall conform with the lighting requirements of Zoning Ordinance. 
(17)  Signs: See Section 1151 Sign Regulations. 
(18)  Construction and Maintenance of Improvements Within Right-of-Way: The construction and maintenance of all improvements behind the curb line or the edge of pavement including, but not limited to, drainage improvements, landscaping improvements, sidewalks, and/or driveway approaches shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. 
(19)  Supplemental Conditions and Safeguards: The Zoning Commission and/or Board of Trustees may impose additional conditions relating to the development with regard to the type and extent of the public improvements to be installed; landscaping; improvements and maintenance of open space areas; and other development characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 2017-35,  1, 8-15-2017) 
CHAPTER 1145 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS[20] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- District regulations, Ch. 1143; Special regulations, Ch. 1147; Off-street parking and loading, Ch. 1149 

1145.01 - GENERAL. 
    The purpose of supplementary district regulations is to set specific conditions for various uses, classifications of uses, or areas wherein problems may occur, in order to alleviate or preclude such problems, and to promote the harmonious exercise of property rights without conflict. 
1145.02 - CONVERSIONS OF DWELLINGS TO MORE THAN ONE UNIT. 
    A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless all of the following conditions are met. 
(a)  The conversion is in compliance with all other local codes and ordinances, and any applicable state or federal regulations. 
(b)  The district within which the residence is located is so regulated as to allow such an increase in dwelling units. 
(c)  The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the zoning regulations for new structures in that district. 
(d)  The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new structures in that district. 
(e)  The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that which is required for new construction in that district. 
(f)  The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and ordinances. 
1145.03 - PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT. 
    No more than one principal building or structure may be constructed upon any one lot for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, unless approved within a planned district development plan and text. Rear dwellings shall be prohibited and shall be considered nonconforming uses subject to the requirements of Chapter 1125. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.04 - REDUCTION OF AREA OR SPACE. 
    No lot, yard, parking area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension if such reduction has the effect of making the lot, yard, parking area, or other space less than the minimum required by this Zoning Ordinance. Furthermore, any lot, yard, parking area, or other space which is already less than the required minimum shall not be reduced further. However, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit the power of the Board of Zoning Appeals in the granting of variances under this Zoning Ordinance. 
1145.05 - CONSTRUCTION IN EASEMENTS. 
    Easements for installation, operation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved as shown on each plat when recorded or otherwise established. Within these easements, no permanent building, structure, or landscape beds and mounding shall be placed or permitted which may damage or which may interfere with the installation, operation, and maintenance of such utilities or which may change the normal direction of flow of drainage channels within the easement. The easement area of each lot, and any improvements within it, shall be maintained continuously by the owner of the lot, except for those improvements for which a public authority or a utility is responsible. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.06 - PARKING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES, MOTOR HOMES, CAMPERS, BOATS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, AND TRAILERS. 
(a)  Parking of Disabled Vehicles. The parking of a disabled vehicle within any district for a period of more than one week, unless otherwise permitted in this Zoning Ordinance, shall be prohibited, except that such a vehicle may be stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building, provided that no business shall be conducted in connection therewith while such vehicle is parked or stored unless permitted elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Outdoor Storage of Inoperable, Unlicensed or Unused Motor Vehicles. Outdoor storage of inoperable, unlicensed or unused motor vehicles for a period exceeding seven days is prohibited unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance or specifically permitted as incident and necessary to a permitted or conditional use. Said vehicles, if stored on the premises for periods exceeding seven days, shall be enclosed within a building so as not to be visible from any adjoining property or public road. 
(c)  Parking in Residential Areas. 
(1)  No trailer of any type, no boats, no campers, no recreational vehicles, no motor homes, and no equipment of any type shall be parked in front of the front building line on any parcel for more than 48 hours in any ten day period. If a building is located on said lot, the building line shall be considered to be the front wall of the building even if said building is located behind the minimum building line established by this Ordinance or the restrictions on the plat or subdivision. 
(2)  No trailer of any type, no boats, no campers, no recreational vehicles, no motor homes, and no equipment of any kind shall be parked within 50 feet of a road right-of-way on any parcel in an "R-Residence" District. 
(3)  No more than one vehicle for sale shall be parked on any residential lot at any one time. No vehicle for sale shall be parked on the lawn area of any lot. 
(d)  Storage Outside of an Enclosed Structure. Storage of a camper, trailer, motor home, boat or recreational vehicle, in any residential district or residential area of a planned district outside of an enclosed structure for more than 48 hours in any ten day period shall be prohibited unless provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
(e)  Occupancy by Guest of Resident Owner. A motor home, recreational vehicle, or camper of any type may be occupied by a guest or a resident owner in a residential district or residential area of a planned district, but such occupancy shall not exceed 14 days in any one calendar year. 
(f)  Mobile Homes, Mobile Office Structures, and Portable Storage Units. 
(1)  Except as provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, no mobile home structure shall be placed or occupied in any district. 
(2)  Temporary structures such as mobile office structures and temporary buildings of a non-residential character may be used incident to construction work on the premises or on adjacent public projects or during a period while the permanent structure is being constructed. The user of said structure shall obtain a permit for such temporary use, which permit shall be valid for six months and may be renewed not more than twice. Renewal of the permit shall be at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator on finding of reasonable progress toward completion of the permanent structure or project. The Zoning Administrator may require provisions for sanitary waste disposal, solid waste disposal, and water supply, as he deems necessary. The fees for such permit and renewals thereof shall be established by the Council. Said temporary structure shall be removed not later than ten days after expiration of said permit. No such unit shall be occupied as a residence. 
(3)  Portable Storage Units. 
A.  "Portable Storage Units" means any portable structure intended to be used on a temporary basis for the loading of materials out of a location within the City of Powell and then moved to another location by a contracted third party or the unloading of materials into a location within the City of Powell in which the portable structure was brought to the location by a third party. 
B.  Portable Storage Units (PSU). The use of PSUs within the municipality, or other similar units, shall be permitted in any zoning district only for the purpose of loading or unloading in association with moving in or out of a building. PSUs shall be parked upon the receiving property for a period not to exceed 72 hours without a Zoning Certificate, and in no case shall a PSU remain on a property for more that seven days. PSUs shall be placed outside of the public right-of-way or private streets, and shall be located on an asphalt or concrete surface. In the event that a PSU needs to be placed within the public right-of-way or on a private street, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Certificate for the location of the PSU, with conditions taken into consideration regarding public health, safety, and welfare. Under no circumstances shall a PSU be located within the ROW of a cul-de-sac bulb. 
(g)  Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles. 
(1)  For purposes of this Section, "commercial vehicle" means any motor vehicle or trailer that is registered with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles as a commercial motor vehicle or a commercial trailer pursuant to Chapter 4503 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(2)  With the exception of the vehicles listed in subsection (b)(3) below, no commercial vehicle shall be parked in any residential district except for the purpose of delivery to or the receiving of goods or other articles, or in connection with the construction, repair or other services being performed, during the actual parking time. 
(3)  The following commercial vehicles may be parked in a residential district. Such vehicles shall be parked in a garage or on an improved impervious surface in a location least intrusive: 
A.  Vehicles associated with legally established home occupations pursuant to Section 1147.08; 
B.  Vehicles with a GVWR (Gross Vehicle Weight Rating) less than 10,000 pounds; 
C.  Any vehicle required to respond on an emergency basis for the public health, safety and welfare, and has received a certificate of exemption from the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 1-15-2008) 
1145.07 - REQUIRED REFUSE COLLECTION AREAS. 
    The refuse collection areas provided by all commercial, industrial, and multifamily residential uses for the collection of trash, garbage, and other refuse shall be adequately screened as defined in Section 1145.29, below, and provisions shall be made for regular and adequate vehicular access to such areas for collection purposes, as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. In addition, the following requirements shall be met: 
(a)  The storage of hazardous or toxic materials or wastes shall not be permitted without documented approval of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or otherwise constitute a fire hazard, or which may attract rodents or insects, shall be stored only in closed containers constructed of impervious materials. 
1145.08 - JUNK. 
    In order to protect residents from conditions conducive to the deprivation of the neighborhood and the infestation and breeding of vermin, insects and rodents, the accumulation or storage for more than 48 hours of junk as defined in this Zoning Code, junk vehicles, disabled or inoperative machinery or equipment, vehicles or machine parts, rags, or any other discarded or stored material shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998) 
1145.09 - SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS. 
    In addition to the regulations specified in Chapter 1143 and in other sections of this Zoning Ordinance, Sections 1145.10-1145.15 inclusive shall be used for clarification and interpretation. 
1145.10 - SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS ON CORNER LOTS. 
    The principal building and its accessory structures located on any corner lot shall be required to have the same setback distance from all street right-of-way lines as required for the front yard in the district in which such structures are located. 
1145.11 - FENCE AND WALL RESTRICTIONS IN FRONT YARDS. 
    In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of two and one-half feet. 
1145.12 - YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS. 
    Multifamily buildings shall be separated as required by the appropriate building code provision regulating the particular setback. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.13 - SIDE AND REAR YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
    Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located nor conducted closer than 40 feet to any lot line of a residential district, except that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to 50 percent of the requirement if acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the Zoning Administrator is provided. Such screening shall be a masonry wall or solid fence between four and eight feet in height maintained in good condition and free of all advertising or other signs. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of a strip of land not less than 20 feet in width planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting or evergreen shrubs not less than four feet in height at the time of planting. Neither type of screening shall obscure traffic visibility as required by this Zoning Ordinance. 
1145.14 - STRUCTURAL SEPARATION. 
    No principal structure shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal structure unless one of said structures has, as its exterior facing wall, a two-hour fire rated wall. 
1145.15 - EXCEPTION TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS. 
    The height limitations contained in the Official Schedule of District Regulations do not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, antennas, water tanks, elevator shafts, ventilators, chimneys, flag poles, cooling towers, conveyors, stage towers, water towers, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. Barn silos, grain elevators, church spires, domes, and flag poles may be erected to any safe and lawful height. Windmills, aerials, antenna or towers if otherwise permitted may be constructed to a height no greater than the distance from the center of the base thereof to the nearest property line of the tract upon which it is located. 
1145.16 - ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS. 
    Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios, bay windows and similar architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side, or rear yard. Decks with decking less than 30 inches off the ground may protrude into a rear yard setback not more than half of the distance of the applicable rear yard setback. Chimneys and escape windows for basements may project into sideyard setback areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.17 - VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS. 
    On a corner lot at the intersection of two streets in any district, nothing shall be installed, erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision materially between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lot and a line joining points along said street lines 50 feet from the point of intersection. On a corner lot at the intersection of two alleys, or at the intersection of an alley and a street, within any district, nothing shall be installed, erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision materially between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the center line grades of the intersecting alleys, or of the intersecting alley and street, in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lot and a line joining points along said alley lines, or alley and street lines, 25 feet from the point of intersection. 
1145.18 - ACTIVITIES TO BE CONDUCTED IN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS. 
    In all districts, all activities and transactions, excepting agriculture, off-street parking, loading and unloading, and outdoor recreation, shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless otherwise specifically authorized by this Zoning Ordinance. 
1145.19 - OBJECTIONABLE, NOXIOUS, OR DANGEROUS USES, PRACTICES, OR CONDITIONS. 
    No land or building in any district shall be occupied or used in any manner which creates or contributes to the existence of conditions which are dangerous, injurious, harmful, noxious, or objectionable, or which may otherwise adversely affect surrounding areas or adjoining premises, except that any use permitted by this Zoning Ordinance in a specific zone may be undertaken or maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce any dangerous or objectionable conditions to acceptable limits, as established in this section, are properly exercised. Specifically, the occupation or use of any land or building in any district shall be in violation of this Zoning Ordinance if one or more of the following conditions are not met: 
(a)  Fire and Explosion Hazards. 
(1)  All activities, including storage, involving flammable or explosive materials shall include the provision of adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion. All standards enforced by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall be adhered to. Burning of waste materials in open fire is prohibited, as enforced by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. The use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be adequately protected by fire-fighting and fire-protection equipment or be such safety devices as are normally required for such activities. Activities involving the use and storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be removed from adjacent facilities or activities to a distance compatible with the potential danger involved. 
(2)  Indoor and outdoor firing ranges, storage, manufacture, and/or reloading of explosive ammunition, shall be permitted conditional uses in planned industrial districts providing special conditional safeguards and under no condition shall be permitted uses in residential or commercial zones. 
(b)  Air Pollution and Radioactivity. No emission of air pollution or radioactivity shall be permitted which violate the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977 or later amendments as enforced by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, shall be permitted. The standards of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall apply and be met. 
(d)  Hazardous Wastes. Hazardous waste conditions shall not be created or continued that are in violation of the regulations of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(e)  Vibrations and Noise. No uses shall be located and no equipment shall be installed in such a way as to produce vibrations which are discernable by the Zoning Administrator, without instruments, at or beyond the property line of the subject premises. Noise standards of the Environmental Protection Agency shall be adhered to. No objectionable noises, as determined to be such by the Zoning Administrator, shall be created due to volume, frequency, or beat. 
(f)  Odors. No use shall be operated so as to produce the continuous, frequent, or repetitive emission of odors or odor-causing substances in such concentrations as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. Applicable standards of the Environmental Protection Agency shall be adhered to. 
(g)  Glare, Heat, Exterior Light and Light Pollution. Any operation producing intense light or heat, such as high temperature processing, combustion, welding, or other shall be performed within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted. No condition of direct or reflected glare shall be created or continued that is visible from any street or from any adjacent property. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not be objectionable to occupants or owners of surrounding areas. No more lighting than is necessary will be installed in order to reduce light pollution. 
(h)  Dust, Silt and Erosion. No condition shall be created or continued in which dust, silt, or other objectionable substances are transferred by wind or water onto any adjacent lot or property in objectionable quantities as determined to be such by the Zoning Administrator. 
(i)  Water Pollution or Contamination. No condition of water pollution or contamination shall be created or continued that is in violation of the regulations of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.20 - ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS AND PLANS. 
    Prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate, the Zoning Administrator may require the submission of written assurances and plans indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable aspects or elements of processes or operations entailed in certain uses or occupations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and tolerances. 
1145.21 - ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS. 
    Any occupancy, use, conditions or circumstances existing in violation of Sections 1145.19 and 1145.20 shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and be subject to the enforcement procedures contained in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1145.22 - TEMPORARY USES. 
(a)  The following regulations are necessary to govern certain uses which are of a non-permanent nature. For such uses requiring temporary zoning certificates, at least seven days before the instigation of such use, an application for a zoning certificate shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, which shall contain a graphic description of the property to be used, a description of the proposed use, and a site plan, with sufficient information to determine the yard, setback, parking, and sanitary facility requirements for the proposed temporary use. 
(b)  The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall be subject to the specified regulations and time limits which follow, as well as the regulations of any district in which they are located. Fees for such temporary zoning certificates shall be as established by Council. 
(1)  Real estate sales offices, which shall contain no living accommodations, shall be permitted within any district for any new subdivision for a period of one year, except that two six-month extensions may be granted if conditions warrant. Such offices shall be removed upon the completion of the sales of the lots therein, or upon the expiration of the zoning certificate, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Temporary sales and services may be permitted within parking areas within any commercial district. A zoning certificate valid for a period not to exceed four consecutive days shall only be issued three times within any 12-month period to any individual or organization. The application for the temporary zoning certificate shall be accompanied by written permission of the property owners, and shall be prominently displayed at the site. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate for such temporary use if he determines that it encroaches upon more than 25 percent of the required parking area or if the Zoning Administrator determines that other significant temporary uses may be adversely affected by such proposed temporary use due to proximity, public safety and service requirements, or other relevant criteria. 
(3)  Temporary retail sales and services, such as sales of plants, flowers, arts and crafts, farm produce, or similar items on lots other than parking lots, including any lot on which an existing business is operating or on which a business is vacated, may be permitted for any for-profit individuals or organizations in any commercial district. A zoning certificate valid for a period not to exceed two consecutive days shall only be issued three separate times for any particular lot within any 12-month period, and not more than one certificate may be issued at the same time for any lot. The applicant must submit a current vendor's license or transient vendor's license, and a written statement from the property owner giving his permission for such use. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit any such use in any case where a valid covenant or deed restriction specifically authorizes such use. In any case, the zoning certificate shall be prominently displayed at the site. The Zoning administrator shall not issue a certificate for such temporary use if he determines that other significant temporary uses may be adversely affected by such proposed temporary use due to proximity, public safety and service requirements, or other relevant criteria. 
(4)  A.  Mobile businesses conducted by a business with an occupancy permit for a permanent location in a non-residential district, conducted in the parking lot of the permanent location, and conducted as part of the business plan for such business, shall be permitted without a zoning certificate. 
B.  Any other mobile business conducted on private property shall only be permitted only with a temporary zoning certificate, and such temporary zoning certificate shall be issued for no more than two consecutive days and for no more than eight days in any calendar month. 
C.  Mobile businesses located on a public parking space on a public street or in a public parking lot require approval from the Parks and Public Service Director, which approval shall specify the approved location for the mobile business and the approved length of time. Such approval shall be for no more than two consecutive days and for no more than eight days in any calendar month. A fee may be required by the City for use of its property as set forth in the fee schedule approved by Council. 
(5)  Garage sales, which for the purposes of this section shall include yard sales, barn sales, and similar activities, may be permitted within any district in which residences are permitted. Any individual or family may conduct such sales upon the property at which he or they reside without obtaining a temporary zoning certificate provided that such sales shall not be conducted on more than six days in any calendar year on more than three consecutive days, so long as the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance pertaining to signs and parking are observed. Garage sale temporary zoning certificates shall only be issued to groups of families, neighborhood organizations, and community organizations two times within any 12-month period and shall not exceed a period of three consecutive days, so long as the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance pertaining to signs and parking are observed. 
(6)  Temporary construction access drives as needed to provide access to a development site on a temporary basis until such time the permanent access drive is installed. Such temporary access drive shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator to be sure that the temporary access drive is located where it creates the least disturbance to existing surrounding development and scenic easement or natural areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, 10-20-2009; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.23 - SANITARY SEWER REQUIREMENTS AND POLLUTION CONTROL. 
    All uses shall be conducted in conformance with regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Delaware County Department of Health. Prior to the issuance of any zoning certificate, evidence of compliance with said regulations shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator. 
1145.24 - WATER IMPOUNDMENTS. 
    All water impoundments such as ponds and lakes shall be constructed and developed in compliance with the following standards: 
(a)  Adjacent to State Route 750, Powell Road, Olentangy Street, Olentangy River Road, Sawmill Road and any road designated as a "parkway" in the Comprehensive Plan, no such pond or lake shall be located closer than 75 feet to the center line of the right-of-way or closer than 55 feet to the center line of any adjacent approved road. 
(b)  No impoundment shall be located in a required front yard in any district except the R-Residence District, except upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or as approved in approved planned district development plans or approved subdivision plats. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.25 - DRAINAGE. 
(a)  All construction within this municipality shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with maintenance of good surface drainage. In all improvements or uses where submittal of drainage plans is not specifically required, every reasonable effort shall be made to insure that proper drainage on the subject property and adjacent or servient properties is maintained or improved. Where applicable, the requirements of the City Engineer shall be complied with. In no event shall any person interdict or interfere with any existing tile or surface drain channel unless it is determined that such tile or channel can be removed or relocated without interfering with the drainage on adjacent properties. 
(b)  No person shall place any dam or other flow restricting structure or device in any watercourse (Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or privately owned or operated) without first having obtained written approval from the City Engineer. 
(c)  No person shall place or deposit or allow to accumulate into any watercourse (Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or privately owned or operated) within the City any garbage, trash, yard waste, soil, rock or similar material, or any other substance which obstructs flow in the system or damages the system or interferes with the proper operation of the system or which constitutes an illicit discharge pursuant to Section 521.12 or is a nuisance or a hazard to the public. 
(d)  Persons shall maintain the privately owned or operated watercourse free of natural obstructions (trash, leaves, tree branches and similar obstructions) to the extent so as not to present a nuisance or a hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2004-49, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.26 - FLOOD PLAIN REGULATION. 
    Certain limited areas lie within a flood plain area. Inundation of those areas during periods of high water can impose great loss of property value unless controls are imposed to insure that land uses within those areas consider such risks and minimize the impact of such flooding. In an effort to control such uses, in the best interest of the municipality, the following regulations shall be imposed: 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall maintain on file for public examination, current maps, delineating the boundaries within the municipality of all lands designated "flood plain." In the event a property owner contests the boundaries of such flood plain, he shall be given reasonable opportunity to present technical evidence to support his position. 
(b)  Open space uses shall be permitted within the flood plain to the extent that they are permitted within the zoning district controlling use of said land and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of material or equipment. 
(c)  No structure shall be permitted within the flood plain and no use shall be permitted within the flood plain which will adversely affect the efficiency or which will restrict the capacity of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or other drainage facility of system. 
(d)  No fill shall be deposited within the flood plain without permission from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Showing must be made that such fill is for some beneficial purpose and will be protected against erosion by rip-rap, vegetation cover or bulkheading. No dredging shall be permitted of the channel or floodway unless the applicant provides evidence to the Planning and Zoning Commission that all State and Federal permits are issued as required by law. 
(e)  See Chapter 1305 for other applicable Flood Hazard Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.27 - SPECIAL BUILDING SETBACK REGULATIONS. 
    No building or use shall be located closer to the centerline of adjoining existing or proposed roadways, streets, or highways than the distances set forth below unless deeper setbacks are provided for elsewhere herein, in the comprehensive plan, or in an approved planned district development plan. 
(a)  Along the new Sawmill Parkway and along Powell Road west of existing Sawmill Road: 150 feet from centerline. 
(b)  Liberty Street north of Grace Drive to Seldom Seen Road: 130 feet from centerline. 
(c)  No less than 80 percent of these setback areas along Sawmill Parkway and North Liberty Street are to be in green lawn, natural woodlands, lakes, farm-land, or pasture. These setback areas at these locations are to be lined with white three or four rail board fences or natural three or four rail split rail fences. 
(d)  Where a road meets a railroad track, the minimum building setback shall be no less than 250 feet measured from the centerline of the road along the railroad right-of-way, tapering back to 150 feet at a distance of no less than 400 feet from the railroad right-of-way measured along the centerline of the road. 
(Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.28 - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION. 
    It being considered important that driveways serving any property or use be constructed in a manner which insures access by emergency vehicles and the free and safe flow of traffic from public streets or roads, the following standards are established for such driveways: 
(a)  All driveways (any use). In addition to the conditions or specifications imposed in subsections (b) or (c) hereinafter established, the following specifications are recommended for all driveways, regardless of the use served thereby: 
(1)  Driveway shall not have a grade, up or down, from the public road pavement level exceeding eight percent. 
(2)  Driveway shall not, at any point over its entire length, contain a grade exceeding eight percent. 
(3)  At the point where the driveway intersects the public road, the same shall have such radii and drain pipe as specified or required by the governmental agency (state, county, or town-ship) which controls the public roadway. 
(4)  If the driveway leaves the public road on an upgrade, design and construction shall include a vertical curve or saddle to prevent the flow of surface drainage from said driveway onto the traveled portion of the public road. 
(5)  If any driveway crosses a drainage swale, stream or ditch, the same shall be bridged by pipe or such structure as required to permit the unobstructed passage of all surface water generated by a five-year storm. Any pipe shall be of sufficient length to extend not less than three feet beyond the toe of the slope of the fill over said pipe unless a properly designed headwall is installed to protect the end of such pipe. Any bridge or structure spanning a stream or ditch shall be designed by a professional engineer with HS 15 loading. No bridge shall be less than 12 feet in width. If the driveway serves a commercial or industrial use, the bridge shall not be less than 18 feet in width. 
(6)  If a fill is placed over any drainage structure or placed to alter the grade of any driveway, the vertical slopes on said fill shall be no steeper than a two-to-one slope. All fill areas shall be scalped of vegetation and excavated to load bearing soil before fill material is placed over it. Such fill shall be free of all humus and organic material and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent proctor. The fill shall be of sufficient width to include a compacted berm beside the graveled or paved area of reasonable width to facilitate safe passage of vehicles. Guard rails or barriers shall be installed when deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to create safe conditions. 
(7)  Drainage ditches shall be constructed as necessary parallel to said driveway which ditch should be graded to a good and sufficient outlet. Siltation control shall be placed in any ditch and such siltation shall not flow to roadside ditches along public roads. 
(8)  All curves in the driveway shall be of sufficient radius (not less than 50 feet) to permit unhindered passage of public safety vehicles, including fire vehicles and all other vehicles reasonably expected to utilize the same. 
(9)  All trees, overhanging branches or other obstructions to the free passage of public safety vehicles shall be removed. 
(10)  Obstructions on the prevailing wind-ward side of the driveway which contribute to drifting of snow shall, when possible, be removed. 
(b)  Residential Driveways. In addition to the conditions imposed by subsection (a) hereinbefore set forth, the following standards are established for driveways serving residential structures or uses: 
(1)  Driveways serving individual residential structures shall not be less than ten feet in width or greater than 20 feet in width at the property line and shall be constructed over an aggregate base of reasonable depth. 
(2)  If the driveway serves two or more residences (not including apartment structures), the same shall be 12 feet in width and shall be constructed over an aggregate base of reasonable depth. 
(3)  If any residential driveway is over 500 feet in length, widened paved passing areas at least 15 feet in width shall be provided at frequent intervals, but not more than 300 feet distant from each other, to permit the free passage of traffic over said drive. 
(4)  Dust control shall be provided on an "as needed" basis. 
(c)  Commercial, Industrial, Public Facility and Apartment Complex Driveways. In addition to the conditions established by subsection (a) hereinbefore set forth, the following standards are established for driveways serving commercial and industrial uses and apartment complexes containing ten or more units and served by a common parking area: 
(1)  Driveways shall be not less than 20 feet in width. 
(2)  Driveway base and surface shall be designed by a professional engineer to sufficient depth for anticipated use and access by public safety vehicles. 
(3)  The finished surface of the driveway shall be hard surfaced and may be of any Ohio Department of Transportation approved materials, such as concrete, asphalt or impervious pavers/pavement. 
(d)  Concrete driveways in addition to the conditions imposed by subsections (a) and (b) or (c) hereinbefore set forth, the following construction standards are established for concrete driveways including the driveway apron and approach, whether or not such is intended for public or private use. 
(1)  Concrete usage; quality. Any and all concrete used shall: 
A.  Contain a cement content of six bags per cubic yard at 94 pounds per bag of Portland cement. 
B.  Have an air entrainment of six percent to eight percent at the time of pour. 
C.  Consist of sound, coarse aggregate of one inch or smaller. 
D.  Contain no more water than will permit a slump between a minimum of four inches and a maximum of six inches. 
E.  Have a uniform thickness of four inches. 
(2)  Curing; mixing; finishing. 
A.  Curing compound must be applied immediately after broom finishing, according to manufacturer's recommendation. 
B.  Calcium chloride or other admixtures shall not be added at the jobsite. 
C.  Minimum floating shall be required. A broom finish shall be required. Finishing must be delayed until water sheen (bleed water) has disappeared from the surface. 
(3)  Base. 
A.  Base must be smooth and consist of undisturbed or compacted earth. A stone, gravel, limestone screenings, or nonsettling material approved by the building official may be used as a leveling course. Excavations or trenches under a drive must be compacted or filled with nonsettling material. 
B.  Subgrade or base shall be dampened if it becomes dry before pouring. 
(4)  Joints. 
A.  Control joints, whether hand-tooled or sawn, shall be to a depth of one-quarter the thickness of the slab. The dimension of any control joint shall not exceed ten feet. 
B.  Isolation joints shall be required where concrete abuts any structure including, but not limited to, foundations, garage floors, stoops, and paved streets. 
(5)  Time of pour. 
A.  If the temperature in the surrounding area is below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, the maximum allowable time from loading to pour shall be one and one-half hours. 
B.  If the temperature in the surrounding area is above 70 degrees Fahrenheit, the maximum time from loading to pour shall be one hour. 
(Ord. No. 92-01; Ord. No. 97-29, 6-17-1997; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.29 - LANDSCAPING; PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of landscape regulation is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare through preservation and protection of the environment in recognition of the vital importance of green plants and trees in the ecological system. It is further intended to specifically promote the orderly and attractive development of the public and private spaces between buildings that have a major impact on community values, to provide for the replacement of trees and major vegetations removed during the course of land development, and to promote utilization of landscape materials as buffers between certain land uses to minimize the possibility of nuisance and the elimination of distractions for traffic passing by or through a particular use area. 
(a)  Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan indicating present and proposed future topography, trees, shrubs, planting areas, walls, drives, parking areas, outdoor lighting and surface drainage facilities shall be submitted for approval with each request for a zoning variance, subdivision approval, conditional use permit, and planned district development plan approval, wherever a site plan is required to be filed, wherever a tree of six inches or greater in trunk diameter measured 24 inches from the ground level is to be removed or relocated, with each request for a zoning certificate for any use that abuts Powell Road, Olentangy Street, Liberty Street, Sawmill Road, Olentangy River Road, and any road designated as a "parkway" in the comprehensive plan, and for any other condition specified in this Zoning Ordinance where a landscape plan is required. The landscape plan shall illustrate the trunk diameter, type of tree, and location of every current tree of six inches in trunk diameter, and every proposed new tree planting. 
(b)  Landscape Plan Conformance Required. 
(1)  No certificate of zoning compliance, zoning certificate, or building permit shall be issued for any site development or for the construction or improvement of any building, structure, or ground area except in compliance with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance through either direct construction/planting on the site or presentation of detailed signed contracts for the installation of plan mandated plant materials as soon as the weather permits. 
(2)  The owner(s) of the premises effected by an approved landscape plan shall maintain such areas in a neat and clean condition, and shall maintain the landscape elements of the approved plan at all times, replacing dead or damaged materials as these needs arise. 
(c)  Preservation of Trees and Woodlands. 
(1)  All possible efforts shall be made to preserve natural vegetation areas. The laying out of streets, lots, utilities, structures, and parking areas shall avoid the unnecessary destruction of heavily wooded areas or outstanding tree specimens. It is further required that whenever possible heavily wooded areas shall be designated as parkland or as natural environmental preserves. 
(2)  All trees having a trunk diameter of six inches or greater as measured 24 inches from the ground level shall be preserved in their current location and condition unless such trees are exempted as follows: 
A.  Trees within public right-of-ways or utility easements; 
B.  Trees within the ground coverage of proposed structures or within 12 feet from the perimeter of such structure(s); 
C.  Trees within the driveway to service a permanent single-family home; and/or 
D.  Trees that, in the judgement of the Zoning Administrator are damaged, diseased, which interfere with utility lines, or are an inappropriate or undesirable species for that specific location. 
(3)  Wherever possible, exempted trees shall be relocated and replanted on the subject site as an alternative to destruction. Destruction of trees exempted under the terms of B. or C. above shall only be undertaken following the submission of documented evidence that relocation and replanting is impossible due to the size, characteristics, or location of the exempted tree at issue. 
(d)  Replacement of Destroyed Trees. 
(1)  For every tree having a trunk diameter of six inches or greater as measured 24 inches from the ground level that is destroyed in the course of development or construction, new trees shall be planted on the subject site having a total trunk diameter of no less than six inches as measured 24 inches from the ground level. No single replacement planting shall have a trunk diameter of less than one and one-half inches as measured 24 inches from the ground level. 
(2)  For every tree having a trunk diameter of six inches or greater as measured 24 inches from the ground level that is destroyed in the course of development or construction for which a replacement as specified in (a), above, is not provided within one year of the date of destruction, the Planning and Zoning Commission may find the owner or applicant in violation of this Ordinance, and assess a fine of $300.00 per violation, such fines to be used by the City to plant trees on public property or right-of-ways. 
(Ord. No. 99-46, 9-7-1999) 
1145.30 - MINIMUM REQUIRED TREES. 
(a)  For all new construction or land development for which a building permit and/or a zoning certificate is required there shall be trees provided for within the structure-related property lot lines equal to or in excess of the following total tree trunk diameters as measured 24 inches from the ground level for the specified building ground coverage square footage or land area square footage, by building and/or land use type, as follows: (The requirements for street trees and parking lot trees are in addition to the trees indicated on this table.) 
(1)  All residences and residential land uses, per dwelling unit: 
1/2? in trunk diameter for every 150 square feet or fraction thereof of building ground coverage, with a minimum of 11/2? of total trunk diameter: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required Up to 450 11/2? 451-600 2? 601-750 21/2? 751-900 3? 901-1,050 31/2? 1,051-1,200 4? 1,201-1,350 41/2? 1,351-1,500 5? 1,501-1,650 51/2? 1,651-1,800 6? 1,801-1,950 61/2? 1,951-2,100 7? 2,101-2,250 71/2? 2,251-2,400 8? 2,401-2,550 81/2? 2,551-2,700 9? 2,701-2,850 91/2? 2,851-3,000 
 etc. 10?  
(2)  All commercial structures, including commercial-related parking, loading and trash storage areas, and all industrial, warehouse, and storage uses and their associated parking, loading, and trash storage areas: 
A.  Up to 20,000 square feet: 2? trunk diameter for every 2,000 square feet or fraction thereof, beginning with a minimum of 3? of total trunk diameter: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required Up to 3,000 3? 3,001-4,000 5? 4,001-6,000 7? 6,001-8,000 9? 8,001-10,000 11? 10,001-12,000 13? 12,001-14,000 15? 14,001-16,000 17? 16,001-18,000 19? 18,001-20,000 21?  
B.  20,001 to 50,000 square feet: a total trunk diameter of 23?, plus 2? of trunk diameter for every 2,000 square feet over 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required 20,001-22,000 23? 22,001-24,000 25? 24,001-26,000 27? 26,001-28,000 29? 28,001-30,000 31? 30,001-32,000 33? 32,001-34,000 35? 34,001-36,000 37? 36,001-38,000 39? 38,001-40,000 41? 40,001-42,000 43? 42,001-44,000 45? 44,001-46,000 47? 46,001-48,000 49? 48,001-50,000 51?  
C.  Over 50,000 square feet: A total trunk diameter of 53?, plus 2? of trunk diameter for every 4,000 square feet over 50,000 square feet or fraction thereof: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required 50,001-54,000 53? 54,001-58,000 55? 58,001-62,000 57? 62,001-66,000 59? 66,001-70,000 61? 70,001-74,000 63? 74,001-78,000 65? 78,001-82,000 67? 82,001-86,000 69? 86,001-90,000 71? 90,001-94,000 73? 94,001-98,000 75? 98,001-102,000 
 etc. 77?  
(3)  All office uses, institutional uses, convalescent and nursing homes and child day-care facilities, including related parking, loading and trash storage areas: 
A.  Up to 19,500 square feet: 2? in trunk diameter for every 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof, beginning with a minimum of 2? of total trunk diameter: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required Up to 2,250 2? 2,251-3,000 4? 3,001-4,500 6? 4,501-6,000 8? 6,001-7,500 10? 7,501-9,000 12? 9,001-10,500 14? 10,501-12,000 16? 12,001-13,500 18? 13,501-15,000 20? 15,001-16,500 22? 16,501-18,000 24? 18,001-19,500 26?  
B.  Over 19,501 square feet: a total trunk diameter beginning at 28?, plus 1? of trunk diameter for every 2,000 square feet over 19,500 square feet or fraction thereof: 
Square Feet Minimum Total Tree Trunk 
Diameter Required 19,501-21,500 28? 21,501-23,500 29? 23,501-25,500 30? 25,501-27,500 31? 27,501-29,500 32? 29,501-31,500 33? 31,501-33,500 34? 33,501-35,500 35? 35,501-37,500 36? 37,501-39,500 37? 39,501-41,500 38? 41,501-43,500 39? 43,501-45,500 40? 45,501-47,500 41? 47,501-49,500 
 etc. 42?  
(4)  All natural environmental preserves, scenic easement areas, and areas to be dedicated to public or private parkland use: 
1? in trunk diameter for every 1,000 square feet of land area or portion thereof, with a minimum of 11/2? of total trunk diameter. 
(b)  No new tree plantings shall be required if existing trees to remain on the site after development, and the aggregate trunk sizes of such trees, meet or exceed the requirements as set forth above. The minimum tree trunk diameter as measured 24 inches from the ground level for such existing trees remaining on the finished site shall be no less than one and one-half inches. 
(c)  New tree plantings shall be no less than one and one-half inches in diameter as measured 24 inches from the ground level. 
(d)  Any number of existing trees and new tree plantings, in combination, that are one and one-half inches or more in diameter, measured 24 inches from the ground level, may be used to meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may determine that additional trees may be required in the event that existing trees used to meet the planting requirement do not adequately shield or landscape the building. 
(f)  New tree plantings shall be selected from the following approved list of trees: 
Large Trees, 45 feet and over 
Black Maple, Acer nigrum 
Freeman Maple, Acer x freemanii 
Sugar Maple, Acer saccharum 
Turkish Filbert, Corylus colurna 
European Beech, Fagus sylvatica 
Ginko (Male only), Ginko bilboa (male) 
Honeylocust, Gledistia triacanthos inermis 
Kentucky Coffeetree, Gymnocladus dioicus 
Sweet Gum, Liquidambar styraciflua 
Dawn Redwood, Metasequoia glyptostroboides 
Black Tupelo, Nyssa sylvatica 
London Planetree, Platanu x acerifolia 
American Sycamore, Platanus occidentalis 
White Oak, Quercus alba 
Swamp White Oak, Quercus bicolor 
Scarlet Oak, Quercus coccinea 
Shingle Oak, Quercus imbricaria 
Burr Oak, Quercus macrocarpa 
Chinkapin Oak, Quercus muehlenbergii 
Pin Oak, Quercus palustris 
Chestnut Oak, Quercus prinus 
English Oak, Quercus robur 
Red Oak, Quercus rubra 
Shumard Oak, Quercus shumardi 
Black Oak, Quercus velutina 
Japanese Pagoda Tree, Sophora japonica 
Baldcypress, Taxodium distichum 
American Linden (Basswood), Tilia americana 
Littleleaf Linden, Tilia x euchlora 
Silver Linden, Tilia tomentosa 
Japanese Zelkova, Zelkova serrata 
Medium Trees, Mostly 35-45 feet 
River Birch, Betula nigra (tree form) 
European Hornbeam, Carpinus betulus 
American Hornbeam, Carpinus caroliniana 
Katsura Tree, Cericidiphyllum japonicum 
American Yellowwood, Cladrastis lutea 
Hardy Rubber Tree, Eucommia ulmoides 
Magnolia Hybrids, Magnolia sp. (tree form) 
American Hophornbeam, Ostrya virginiana 
Sargent Cherry, Prunus sargentii 
Sawtooth Oak, Quercus acutissima 
Lacebark Chinese Elm, Ulmus parvifolia 
Columnar, Fastigiate or Narrow Pyramical Types 
Turkish Hazel, Corylus colurna 
Dawyck European Beech, Fagus sylvatica "Dawyck" 
Ginkgo, Ginkgo biloba 'Princeton Sentry' (male only) 
American Sweetgum, Liquidambar styraciflua 'Slender Silhouette' 
Pyramidal English Oak, Quercus robus, "Fastigiata" 
Small Trees, Mostly 10-25 feet 
Trident Maple, Acer buergeranum 
Canyon Maple, Acer grandidentatum 
Paperbark Maple, Acer griseum 
Tatarian Maple, Acer tataricum 
Serviceberry, Amelanchier sp. (tree form) 
Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn, Crataegus crusgalli 
Lavelle Hawthorn, Crataegus x lavellei 
Thornless Thicket Hawthorn, Crataegus punctata 
Green Hawthorn, Crataegus viridis 
Amur Maackia, Maackia amurensis 
Crabapple, Malus sp. (oval, upright forms only) 
Cherry, Prunus spp. (including weeping forms) 
Japanese Tree Lilac, Syringa reticulata 
Blackhaw Viburnum, Viburnmun prunifolium 
Park Trees 
Large Trees 
White Fir, Abies concolor 
Red Maple, Acer rubrum 
Yellow Buckeye, Aesculus flava 
Northern Catalpa, Catalpa speciosa 
Hackberry, Celtis occidentalis 
Persimmon, Diospyros virginiana 
Pignut Hickory, Carya glabra 
Shellbark Hickory, Carya laciniosa 
Shagbark Hickory, Carya ovata 
American Beech, Fagus grandifolia 
Eastern Redcedar, Juniperus virginiana 
Eastern Larch, Larix laricina 
Tuliptree, Liriodendron tulipifera 
Cucumbertree Magnolia, Magnolia acuminata 
Norway Spruce, Picea abies 
White Spruce, Picea glauca 
Colorado Spruce, Picea pungens 
Eastern White Pine, Pinus strobus 
Black Cherry, Prunus serotina 
Douglasfir, Pseudotsuga menziesii 
Overcup Oak, Quercus lyrata 
Willow Oak, Quercus phellos 
Sassafras, Sassafras albidum 
Eastern Hemlock, Tsuga canadensis 
Medium Trees 
Carolina Silverbell, Halesia carolina 
White Cedar, Thuja occidentalis 
Small Trees 
Red Buckeye, Aesculus pavia 
Pawpaw, Asimina triloba 
Eastern Redbud, Cercis canadensis 
Pagoda Dogwood (Alternate-leaf Dogwood), Cornus alternifolia 
Flowering Dogwood, Cornus florida 
Common Hoptree (Wafer Ash), Ptelea trifoliata 
(g)  Trees not included above may be approved for utilization upon submission of a letter of recommendation of approval of this additional species from the Urban Forester of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources addressed to the Zoning Inspector. Upon receipt of such a letter, and an action of acceptance by the Planning and Zoning Commission, this additional approved tree shall be added to this listing. The Zoning Inspector shall keep a file of such approvals and shall add newly approved trees to this list in subsequent printings of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Red Oak, Black Tupelo, Sassafras, and Magnolia trees planted to meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall only be planted in the spring. 
(i)  New street tree plantings shall be required for all new commercial, industrial, office and institutional developments, as selected from the above listed approved trees and following the street tree planting guidelines as published by the City. 
(Ord. No. 99-46, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1145.31 - REQUIRED LANDSCAPING OF PARKING AREAS. 
    In all parking areas in which more than ten parking spaces are required, there shall be one parking bay (space) left unpaved, but concrete curbed, filled with sodded grass, and containing no less than one deciduous tree of one and one-half inch trunk diameter or more, measured 24 inches from the ground, for every eight parking spaces, or portion thereof, provided. No more than eight parking spaces shall be provided side-by-side in any aisle without interjection of such a "planting bay". Every parking aisle that is bounded at an end by a traffic lane shall be terminated at such traffic lanes by such a "planting bay." 
1145.32 - REQUIRED LANDSCAPING AROUND BUILDING FOUNDATIONS. 
    In all commercial, office and industrial zoning district, as well as nonresidential buildings in residential zoning districts, landscaping consisting of a variety of trees, shrubs, perennial and annual flowers, and other perennial or annual plants shall be planted as part of the overall landscaping plan for that property. At a minimum, at least 70 percent of the lineal footage around the perimeter of a structure shall be landscaped in this manner. Shrubs or hedges shall be grouped rather than spaced as single shrubs at regular distances. A minimum of five shrubs shall be planted in every 40 feet of lineal building perimeter. A minimum of ten perennial or annual plants and/or flowers shall be planted in every 40 feet of lineal building perimeter. All landscaping shall be done following the best professional standard practices. 
(Ord. No. 99-46, 9-7-1999) 
1145.33 - SCREENING. 
    Screening or buffering in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be provided: 
(a)  For any permitted or conditionally permitted non-residential uses which abut any residential district, or current residence, in addition to setback and yard requirements provided elsewhere in the Ordinance. Applicants for a zoning certificate may request a variance from yard or setback requirements in conjunction with a plan for screening, which the Board of Zoning Appeals may consider by weighing the relationship of the proposed screening plan and the requested dimensional variance with respect to their joint impact upon neighboring properties. Such requested variance for a conditionally permitted use shall be incorporated in the conditional use procedure specified in Chapter 1129. The following provisions shall apply with respect to screening. 
(1)  Screening shall be provided for one or more of the following purposes: 
A.  A visual barrier to partially or completely obstruct the view of structures or activities. 
B.  An acoustic screen to aid in absorbing or deflecting noise. 
C.  A physical barrier to contain debris and litter. 
(2)  Screening may consist of one of the following, or a combination of two or more, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Inspector or Board of Zoning Appeals, in the event of a development plan review, appeal, variance, or conditional use: 
A.  A solid masonry wall; 
B.  A solidly constructed decorative fence; 
C.  A louvered fence; 
D.  A dense vegetative planting; 
E.  A landscaped mounding. 
(3)  Height of screening shall be in accordance with the following: 
A.  Visual screening walls, fences, plantings, mounds or a combination of these elements shall be a minimum or five and one-half feet high in order to accomplish the desired screening effect. Plantings shall be a minimum of four feet in height at the time of planting. 
B.  A dense vegetative planting with a minimum height of four feet at planting and a mature height of at least five and one-half feet or greater, or a solidly constructed decorative fence, shall be permanently maintained along the mutual boundary of an accessory parking area and adjacent land zoned for or currently used for residential uses, except for the portion of such boundary located within a required front yard. 
(4)  Screening for purposes of absorbing or deflecting noise shall have a depth of at least 15 feet of dense planting or a solid masonry wall in combination with decorative plantings. The height shall be adequate to absorb noise as determined by the Zoning Administrator in relation to the nature of the use. 
(5)  Whenever required screening is adjacent to parking areas or driveways, such screening shall be protected by bumper blocks, posts, or curbing to avoid damage by vehicles. 
(6)  All screening shall be trimmed, maintained in good condition, and free of advertising or other signs, except for directional signs and other signs for the efficient flow of vehicles as permitted by other elements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  For service courts and loading dock areas in non-residential districts, both planned and standard, all areas used for service, loading and unloading activities shall be adequately screened from sight from adjacent or abutting residences, zoned residential areas, public ways, and public lands. Such screenings shall: 
(1)  Consist of walls, fences, landscape materials, or an acceptable combination of these elements, provided that the height of any wall or fence structure is no less than seven feet and no more than 12 feet. 
(2)  Cover a minimum of 75 percent of the area of the visual face of the adjacent or abutting residential or residentially zoned property, public way or public land extending to a height of nine feet from ground level. In addition, such screenings during minimum foliage shall have a minimum opaqueness of 75 percent. The use of year-round vegetation, such as pines or evergreens is encouraged. 
(3)  Be no closer than three feet to any property line. 
(c)  For trash containers and receptacles in commercial, office, and industrial districts for multi-family residential developments in any district, trash containers and refuse areas shall be adequately screened from sight by walls, fences, landscaping materials or an acceptable combination of these elements, provided that: 
(1)  The height of such walls, fences or landscaping is no less than six feet and the height of walls and fences does not exceed ten feet, and 
(2)  All screening during minimum foliage shall have a minimum opaqueness of 75 percent. The use of dense year-round vegetation, such as spruce, pines or evergreens is encouraged. 
(d)  (1)  Where commercial and/or office uses abut an existing residential district, or residential area of a planned district, screening shall be provided between such uses on the commercial or office site. Such screening shall cover a minimum of 50 percent of the area of the visual face formed by the rear and side property lines extended vertically to a height of seven feet, and extended horizontally between the side lot lines for the rear property line and between the front building line and the rear property line for side lot lines. Where trees and/or shrubs are used for such screening purposes, such landscape materials shall be located no closer than three feet to any property line. 
(2)  Such screening, during minimum foliage, shall have a minimum opaqueness of 75 percent; walls or fence structures constructed for this purpose shall have a minimum height of four feet. The use of dense year-round vegetation, such as pines or evergreens is encouraged. 
(e)  (1)  Where industrial, warehouse, and/or storage uses abut an existing residence, residential district, or residential area of a planned district, screening shall be provided between such uses on the industrial, warehouse, and/or storage site. Such screening shall cover a minimum of 80 percent of the area of the visual face formed by the rear and side property lines extended vertically to a height of ten feet, and extended horizontally between the side lot lines for the rear property line, and between the front building line and the rear property line for side lot lines. When trees and/or shrubs are used for such screening purposes, such landscape materials shall be located no closer than three feet to any property line. 
(2)  Such screening, during minimum foliage, shall have a minimum opaqueness of 80 percent; walls or fence structures constructed for this purpose shall have a minimum height of seven feet and maximum height of 12 feet. The use of dense year-round vegetation, such as pines or evergreens, is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 99-46, 9-7-1999) 
1145.33.1 - HAZARD TREES. 
    The Zoning Administrator may identify hazard trees in the Municipality. Hazard trees are hereby defined as any tree within the Municipality that is dead, diseased or otherwise threatening to fall within public lands or public right of way or easements as determined by the Zoning Administrator. If a hazard tree is identified, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of the hazard tree and require the owner to remove the hazard tree. The owner has the right to hire a Certified Arborist to determine if the tree is not hazardous. A copy of the report from the Certified Arborist shall be given to the Zoning Administrator if the owner wishes to have the tree remain. The Zoning Administrator has authority to enter onto any property within the Municipality to determine if a tree is a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. If an owner does not remove a hazard tree within 30 days after being notified that the tree is a hazard, the Municipality may then go on to the property and cause the removal of the hazard tree. All expenses incurred by the Municipality in removing the hazard tree shall be borne upon the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 99-46, 9-7-1999) 
1145.33.2 - NATURAL LANDSCAPING. 
(a)  Private Naturally Landscaped Lot Defined. A private naturally landscaped lot is a privately owned residential lot which is landscaped so as to exhibit the deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate and maintain those native or naturally occurring species identified as wildflower and prairie grasses in commonly accepted publications on natural landscaping as recommended by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or other governmental agencies. These publications must be accepted by the Zoning Administrator. The lot must have coverage of more than 30 percent of the lot in front of the house or main building in order to be considered a naturally landscaped lot. Wooded front yards or wooded rear yards, 70 percent or greater coverage with trees shall not be subject to these natural landscaping requirements. Non-residential lots shall be allowed to landscape as a natural landscaped lot. 
(b)  Zoning Certificate Not Required. A Zoning Certificate is not required in order to have a naturally landscaped lot. However, the following standards are required for individuals desiring a naturally landscaped lot: 
(1)  Setback. Natural landscaping on private lots shall be located no closer than two feet from the public sidewalk or street right-of-way, or within four feet of any other property line; provided however, no rear or side yard setback shall be required where the natural landscaping material abuts permitted natural landscaping material on an adjacent lot. Natural landscaping shall not be allowed within the area between the sidewalk and curb, except for small areas around a mailbox. 
(2)  Lot coverage. The maximum coverage of any naturally landscaped lot shall be 50 percent of the lot area in front of the house and 50 percent in back of the house, not otherwise covered by buildings, decks, driveways and other accessory uses. 
(3)  Maintenance. A naturally landscaped lot shall be maintained using the best management practices as described in commonly accepted publications on natural landscaping as recommended by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or other governmental agencies. These publications must be accepted by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Compliance. Compliance with this section shall be required at the earliest time allowed by law. For existing properties that can be defined as a naturally landscaped lot, compliance with this section shall be accomplished within six months of the effective date of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement and Penalties. Refer to Section 1135.20 and Section 1135.21 for Penalties and Fines and Additional Remedies. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, 6-19-2001) 
1145.34 - FENCES, WALLS, SHRUBBERY, AND HEDGES IN "RESIDENCE" (R), "OLD POWELL RESIDENCE" (OPR), AND "PLANNED RESIDENCE" (PR) DISTRICTS, AS WELL AS IN ALL RESIDENTIAL PORTIONS OF OTHER PLANNED DISTRICTS; PURPOSE. 
    It is the purpose of this section to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by establishing regulations controlling the use of fences, walls, shrubbery and hedges, assuring residents of residential areas privacy and personal preference in landscape design within their own properties subject to and with due consideration of the environment of neighbors, the appearance of the community as a whole, and the safety of the public and the individual. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Fence: Any structure regardless of its composition, including a wall that is erected in such a manner or position so as to enclose, partially enclose, or divide any property or part thereof from an adjoining premises. Trellises or other structures supporting vegetation, when erected in such a position as to enclose, partially enclose, or divide any premises from an adjoining premises, shall also be considered a fence. 
(2)  Solid fence (wall): Those structures which have less than 50 percent free and open space. Gates and openings shall not be counted as free or open space when determining whether or not a fence is considered solid. Structures erected on other than on lot lines or in close proximity to lot lines or easement lines which have a solely ornamental purpose and which do not in fact serve the purpose of enclosing, or partially enclosing, or dividing a premises or any part thereof from an adjoining premises shall not be included within the definitions of the words "fence" or "wall." 
(3)  Barbed wire fence: A wire fence with metal barbs or sharp points protruding at intervals. 
(4)  Chain link fence: A fence made of metal consisting of loops of wire interconnected in a series of formed links. 
(5)  Electrified fence: A fence or structure designed to carry an electric charge, impulse, or shock when same comes into contact with any other object, person, or thing, or which causes or may cause burns to any person or animal. 
(6)  Open ornamental fence: Any structure composed of wood or metal constructed for beauty or decorative effect having not less than 50 percent free and open space. Such fences include "rail" or "split rail" fences, meaning fences constructed of narrow, whole or split wooden timbers placed horizontally between upright supporting poles, and "picket" fences, meaning a fence with an open face made of upright poles or slats. 
(7)  Stockade/privacy fence: Any structure consisting of a row of large pointed or flat stakes, slats, or posts placed upright against each other or made of interwoven strips or slats of flexible or semi-flexible materials, or made of a series of slats placed at an angle or position so as to provide air but to deflect light perpendicular to its vertical plane, or similar structure. 
(8)  Shrubbery of hedges: Natural growth without thorns placed in a series and intended to be utilized as a fence as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  No fence or wall located in a rear yard area shall exceed five feet in height above the finished grade. In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which practically impedes vision across such yard above the height of two and one-half feet, and no hedge or other vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard between the height of two and one-half and six and one-half feet. 
(2)  Supporting members for wall and fences shall be installed so as not to be visible from any other property which adjoins or faces the fences or walls being installed. This requirement shall not apply to fences or walls which are designed so that supporting members are identical in appearance on both sides of the fence or wall. 
(c)  Permit and Inspection. No fence or wall shall be erected or constructed until a fence permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator who shall review each request to determine compliance with this Section. Application for such permit shall be made in writing by the property owner or individual in possession of such property and shall be accompanied by plans or drawings showing the actual shape and dimension of the lot on which the fence or wall is to be erected, the exact height, location, length, type of material, and type of construction of such proposed fence or wall and the location of all buildings on the lot and on adjoining lots. The fee for such fence or wall permit shall be established by Council. All fences which have been inspected and are in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall receive a certificate of compliance. 
(d)  Prohibited Fences or Walls. Prohibited fences or walls include any fence exceeding five feet in height, barbed wire fences, chain link fences, interwoven (plastic, metal, fiber glass or similar composition) fences, stockade type fences consisting of a row of large pointed or flat stakes, slats or poles placed upright against each other, and boundary line (including property and easement boundary lines) electrified fences. 
(e)  Permitted Fences. 
(1)  Open, ornamental fences, and shrubbery fences or hedges shall be permitted styles of fences within the municipality of Powell. Privacy fences will only be permitted in rear or side yards subject to the following: 
(2)  Privacy fences of any material may be erected not more than five feet in height, measured from the grade, providing written consent is obtained from record owners of all adjacent lots and all lots within 200 feet. Written consent by the record owners of the aforementioned parcels, both affected and adjoining, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Fences or walls of wood or masonry construction not more than six feet in height as measured from the floor grade of a patio or deck may be erected around the perimeter of said patio or deck as long as no portion of said patio or deck, fence or wall, is within a required setback, natural open space preserve, or easement. 
(f)  Trees, Shrubbery, and Hedges. Trees, shrubbery, and/or hedges shall only be permitted in locations that are outside of established utility and drainage easements. Any tree, shrub, or hedge found to be located on public property or in an established utility or drainage easement may be removed by the Municipality at any time. 
(g)  Location of Fences. 
(1)  All fences or walls constructed in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance shall be erected in a manner consistent with the maintenance of good surface drainage. Any construction of fences will be made to insure the proper drainage on the subject property and adjacent or servient properties. In no event shall any person interdict or interfere with any existing tile or surface drain channels or areas which have either shown or have been designated as surface drainage channels unless it is fully determined beyond doubt that such tile or channel can be removed or relocated without interfering with the drainage of adjacent properties or parcels. No fence will be constructed or installed within the Municipality in the course of any easement for public utilities or drainage easement without the approval of the public utility and with concurrence of the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator. Any denial of concurrence by the City Engineer or Zoning Administrator shall be in writing and shall state the basis therefor. Fences shall not be located within a public right-of-way. All structural members used in the construction of fences shall be on the interior side of the fence. All permitted fences shall have no less than three inches of distance between the ground and the fence to promote good surface drainage. 
(2)  On a corner lot, no fence or wall shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow, or maintained within the triangular yard space formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining points on such street lines 50 feet from the point of intersection of the street lines. 
(h)  Maintenance. All permitted fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition, shall be structurally sound, and shall be attractively finished at all times. Any grounds between such structures or fences and property lines shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and well cared for condition at all times. The Zoning Administrator for the Municipality of Powell may issue citations for fences or walls which are in disrepair. 
(i)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity which constructs, erects, or places a fence in violation of this Zoning Ordinance or causes or permits a fence to be erected in violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be fined not more than $25.00 per day. Each day that said violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity which fails to repair a fence after being notified that a repair is required shall be fined not more than $25.00 per day for violation of this Zoning Ordinance. Each day said fence continues in a state of disrepair shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to all other penalties contained herein, the municipality of Powell may seek an order from a Court of competent jurisdiction for removal of any fence which violates the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(j)  Variance. Variances from the above requirements, except for corner lots, may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals without a public hearing if written consent is obtained by all record owners and affected properties. Additionally, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may, when acting within their review procedures, exempt a fence or wall from this Zoning Ordinance when it is determined that the health, safety, or general welfare would be best served by such an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 91-40; Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1147 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS[21] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference- Supplementary district regulations, Ch. 1145; Signs, Ch. 1151 

1147.01 - GENERAL. 
    It is the purpose of these special regulations to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to establish regulations affecting uses and practices which, were they to be established and maintained without any guidance or restriction or control, tend to result in dangerous situations threatening the safety of citizens, to contribute to circumstances undermining the morals of the youth of the community, or to generate conflicts in uses or practices upsetting the harmony of the community and impinging upon the property rights of others. 
1147.02 - RESERVED. 
1147.03 - AMUSEMENT ARCADES. 
    The following regulations shall apply to amusement arcades as herein defined. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by regulating amusement arcades where mechanically or electronically operated amusement devices are kept, operated, or maintained. It is further the intent of these sections to coordinate the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance with the requirements of any other code governing the licensing and regulation of mechanical amusement devices in such a manner that, in the event of any conflict between the respective regulations, the more restrictive requirement or the more severe penalty shall prevail. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in interpretation of this section: 
(1)  Amusement arcade means a place of business within a building or any part of a building having more than five mechanical or electronically operated amusement devices which are used for the purpose of public entertainment through the operation, use, or play of any table game or device commonly known as an electronic game which is operated by placing therein any coin, plate, disc, slug, key, or token of value by payment of a fee. 
(2)  Mechanical or electronically operated amusement device means any machine, device or instrument which, by payment of a fee or other things of value, or by the insertion of a coin, plate, disc, slug, key or token, operates or may be operated as a game, contest or amusement, and which contains no automatic pay-off device for the return of money, coins, tokens or merchandise or check redeemable in money or anything of value. "Mechanical or electronically operated amusement device" includes, but is not limited to, devices such as mechanical baseball, mechanical football, pinball machines, any table game or device commonly known as an electronic game, and other similar types of devices; provided however, that this definition is not intended to, nor shall it be construed to, include merchandise vending machines or coin operated mechanical or electrical musical instruments or devices. 
(3)  Exhibitor means any person owning and exhibiting or contracting or permitting any mechanical or electrically operated amusement device to be installed, used and exhibited in his own place of business, irrespective of the ownership of such device. 
(c)  Conditional Use Permit Required. No amusement arcade shall be established, operated or maintained in any place of business or on any premises unless authorized by the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1129. In addition to said provisions, amusement arcades shall comply with the following conditional use criteria: 
(1)  Amusement arcades shall comply with the district regulations applicable to all properties in any zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  Amusement arcades shall have an adult who is 18 years of age or over on the premises and supervising the amusement arcade at all times during its hours of operation. 
(3)  Amusement arcades shall have necessary security personnel as required by the appropriate law enforcement agency to police the interior and exterior of the premises. 
(4)  The interior of the amusement arcades shall provide a minimum area per coin-operated amusement device equal to the size of the device plus two feet of area on either side plus an area of four feet in front of the device. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a conditional use permit the applicant shall provide evidence that the structure meets the minimum requirements of the appropriate electrical and fire codes. 
(6)  If the place of business or premises for which an amusement arcade is proposed is a free standing building, the application for the conditional use permit shall include an approvable exterior lighting plan. 
(7)  In establishments which serve alcoholic beverages, any area containing amusement devices shall be visually separated from that portion or portions of the establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are served or sold for carrying out of the premises. 
(8)  No amusement arcade may be established, operated or maintained in any place of business or on any premises which is within 500 feet of any adult entertainment business. 
(9)  The application for the conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's license to operate and exhibit amusement devices, and a notarized statement that the applicant shall not permit any person under 14 years of age or younger to operate any devices on the premises before 4:00 P.M. on days when school is in session. 
(d)  Zoning of Amusement Arcades. Amusement arcades shall be conditionally permitted uses only in planned commercial districts. 
(e)  Maintenance of a Nuisance Prohibited. It shall be the obligation of the exhibitor of an amusement arcade to maintain peace and quiet and order in and about the premises. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance, which shall be a minor misdemeanor. 
(f)  Restricted Access to Certain Minors. No amusement arcade exhibitor shall permit, on days when school is in session, any person 14 years of age or younger to operate any mechanical or electrically operated amusement device or to be or remain in an amusement arcade before 4:00 p.m. This provision does not apply to juke boxes, mechanical musical instruments, or other mechanical amusement devices designed to be ridden, such as mechanical horses, automobiles, and carrousels. Violations of this provision shall be a minor misdemeanor. 
(g)  Complaints Regarding Amusement Arcades. 
(1)  Any resident of the Municipality may submit a written notice of complaint regarding the operation of any amusement arcade to the Zoning Administrator. The notice of complaint shall include the name and address of the complainant, the address of the location of the amusement arcade, and the specific reasons why the individual is complaining. 
(2)  If the Zoning Administrator determines, after interviewing both the complainant and the amusement arcade exhibitor, that the specific reasons in the complaint appear to be proper grounds for suspension or revocation of the conditional use permit, he shall refer the matter to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(h)  Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall revoke the conditional use permit for any amusement arcade in the event that the license to operate such amusement arcade is revoked. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke the conditional use permit for any amusement arcade if so determined pursuant to the action of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or to the final decision from appeal to the Council, according to the provisions of subsection (i) hereof. 
(i)  Procedure for Revocation. The Zoning Administrator shall notify in writing the Board of Zoning Appeals whenever he has reason to believe that the operation of an amusement arcade has resulted in a violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance. Within ten days from said notification the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the conditional use permit should be revoked. Notice of this hearing shall be served on the amusement arcade exhibitor and, if the Zoning Administrator referral to the Board of Zoning Appeals originated from a complainant, to the complainant, at least five days before the hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals may also give such other notice as it deems appropriate, including notice to property owners and notice on the Municipality of Powell website. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a decision within five days after the hearing and shall notify the amusement arcade exhibitor and, if applicable, the complainant. The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be appealed to Council within ten days of its issuance of said decision. The Council shall hold a public hearing within 20 days of its receipt of such appeal, after giving public notice of such hearing on the City website at least five days prior to the date of the hearing, and shall make a final determination on the revocation of the conditional use permit within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1147.04 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. 
    The following regulations shall apply to adult entertainment business as herein defined. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of adult entertainment businesses. It is the intent of these sections to regulate such entertainment businesses, as defined herein, in such a manner as to prevent erosion of the character of the surrounding neighborhoods and to prohibit the establishment of such businesses within close proximity to existing adult entertainment businesses, residentially zoned areas, schools, churches, parks and playgrounds within the City. Except as provided for herein, adult entertainment businesses and/or adult entertainment facilities, as hereinafter defined, are not permitted in the Municipality of Powell. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Adult entertainment business and/or adult entertainment facility includes, but is not limited to the following: adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in motion picture theater, adult only entertainment establishment, adult arcade, adult dancing establishment, and massage establishments. Regardless of any other provision contained herein, any commercial establishment that profits from the exposition of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be deemed to be an adult entertainment business or facility as defined herein. 
(2)  Adult arcade means an establishment where for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, VCR's or similar machines for viewing by five of fewer persons, which are used to show films, motion pictures, slides, videotapes or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, an adult arcade is included within the definition of an adult motion picture theater. 
(3)  Adult book store means an establishment which utilizes ten percent or more of its retail selling are for the purpose of retail sale or rental, or offers of sale or rental, for any form of consideration, or for the purpose of display by coin or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices, or both, books, magazines, other periodicals, novelties, devices, films, tapes and/or cassettes which are distinguished by their emphasis on adult materials as defined in this section. Establishments with less than ten percent of retail selling area dedicated to these purposes shall not be considered an "adult book store" if such material is kept in a location where it is not visible to customers of such place. 
(4)  Adult dancing establishment means a commercial establishment that permits, suffers, or allows dancers to display or expose specified anatomical areas. Any establishment on whose premises an employee displays or exposes specified anatomical area or areas shall be deemed to be an adult dancing establishment and shall be subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(5)  Adult motion picture booth means an enclosed area designed or used for the viewing by one or two persons of motion pictures, films, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, an adult motion picture booth is included within the definition of an adult motion picture theater. 
(6)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed motion picture theater which is regularly used or utilizes 15 percent or more of its total viewing time, for presenting material on a regular basis, for any form of consideration, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to adult material as defined in this section, and includes any facility such as a hotel or motel, which advertises the presentation of such material. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, an adult motion picture theater includes both an adult arcade and an adult motion picture booth. 
(7)  Adult motion picture drive-in theater means an open air drive-in theater which is regularly used or utilizes 15 percent or more of its total viewing time, for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to adult material as defined in this section. 
(8)  Adult only entertainment establishment means an establishment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee where the establishment features entertainment or services which constitute adult material as defined in this section, or which features exhibitions, dance routines, or gyrational choreography of persons totally nude, topless, bottomless, or strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment or services which constitute adult material. 
(9)  Adult material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, slide, transparency, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record or tape, other tangible thing, or any service, capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch, and: 
A.  Which material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter displaying, describing, or representing sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human bodily functions of elimination; or 
B.  Which service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual activity masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human bodily functions of elimination. 
(10)  Bottomless means less than full opaque covering of male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks. 
(11)  Commercial means operated for pecuniary gain; pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
(12)  Consent means acquiescence to conduct an activity. The owner and/or manager of any establishment shall be presumed to have consented to activity conducted upon a premises within their control. 
(13)  Establishment of an adult entertainment business or facility shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, the conversion of an existing business location, or the addition or materials or facilities to an existing business qualifying the business as a use defined herein as constituting such an adult entertainment business or facility. 
(14)  Massage establishment means a site or premises or portion thereof upon which any person who is an employee or who with the consent of the owner manipulates the superficial tissues of the body of another person with the head, hand, foot, leg, arm, torso or elbow, but not including the following: licensed health care facility, licensed physical therapists, licensed physicians or nurses engaged in the practice of their profession, educational athletic facilities, if the massage is a normal and usual practice in such facilities. "Owner" means the owner; in the case of a proprietorship shall be the proprietor; in the case of a partnership shall be all partners, either general or limited; in the case of a corporation shall be all of the officers of said corporation. 
(15)  Religious institutions means buildings which are used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
(16)  School means an institution of learning for minors whether public or private which offers instruction in courses of study and which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, child day-care, elementary school, junior high school and senior high school. 
(17)  Specified anatomical areas means human genitals, less than completely and opaquely covered, the pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple) and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(18)  Specified sexual activities means human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human bestiality, buggery, flagellation, masochism, intercourse, sodomy or zooerasty; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; and any excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the above activities. 
(19)  Straddle dancing means the placing for any form of consideration of the buttock, pubic or genital area of an employee or an individual, not an employee, who performs the same with the consent of the owner, whether clothed or not, in contact with the pubic or genital area of a patron or spectator, whether clothed or not, or within one foot of the face of a spectator or patron. 
(20)  Nude or nudity means the showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than full, opaque covering of any portion thereof, or female breast(s) with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(21)  Topless means the showing of a female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple. 
(22)  Sexual activity means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both. 
(23)  Sexual contact means any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying either person. 
(24)  Sexual excitement means the condition of the human male or female genitals, when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(c)  Obscenity Not Permitted. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to condone or permit obscenity or pandering the same as presently defined in Ohio Revised Code Title 29, and as the same may be amended in the future. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to condone or permit offenses against morals as defined in Chapter 533 of the Codified Ordinances of the Municipality of Powell as the same now exist and as they may hereafter be amended. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exposing to minors of motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations of specified sexual activity or persons displaying or exhibiting specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  No person shall violate the laws of the United States of America, State of Ohio or Municipality of Powell as they relate to obscenity. 
(d)  Conditional Use Permit Required. No building shall be erected, constructed, or developed, and no building or premises shall be reconstructed, remodeled, arranged for use or used for any adult entertainment business unless authorized by the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1129. In addition to said provisions, an adult entertainment business shall comply with the following conditional use criteria: 
(1)  Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the district regulations applicable to all properties in any district in which they are located. 
(2)  In addition to all other requirements contained in this Zoning Ordinance, an applicant for a Conditional Use Permit for an adult entertainment facility or business shall submit with his application for said Conditional Use Permit the following information: 
A.  If the applicant is an individual, his name and all aliases used by him; if the applicant is a partnership, the full name of the partnership and the names and addresses of all partners, whether general or limited, accompanied by a copy of the written partnership agreement; if the applicant is a corporation, the exact corporate name, a copy of the Articles of Incorporation, a certificate that the corporation is in good standing in the State of Ohio, the names and addresses of all officers, directors, and the names and addresses of all shareholders who own more than a five percent interest in said corporation. 
B.  A statement as to whether the applicant, partners, officers, directors or shareholders have within the five year period immediately preceding the date of the application been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the particular criminal act involved and the place of conviction. 
C.  The names and addresses of all employees. 
(3)  No adult entertainment business shall be permitted in a location which is within 1,500 feet of another adult entertainment business; 
(4)  No adult entertainment business shall be permitted in a location which is within 1,000 feet of any church, residence, any public or private school, any park, any playground, any social services facility or neighborhood center, or any area zoned for residential use. 
(5)  No adult entertainment business shall be permitted in a location which is within 1,000 feet of any boundary of any residential district in a local unit or government abutting the City. 
(e)  Zoning of Adult Entertainment Businesses. Adult entertainment businesses shall be conditionally permitted uses only in those portions of planned industrial districts designated in an adopted planned development district plan for production industry, and shall be prohibited uses in all other districts of the City. 
1147.05 - REGULATION OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS. 
    This section, provide for the location and regulation of manufactured home parks in order to foster their development and maintenance as an integral and stable part of the community. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and include any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the facilities of such park. A tract of land which is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots is not a manufactured home park even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority. "Manufactured Home Park" does not include any tract of land used solely for the storage or display for sale of manufactured homes. 
(2)  Manufactured home for the purpose of this section means any nonself-propelled vehicle transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, and when erected in combinations on the site has a total residential floor area of no less than 800 square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(b)  Approval Procedures. Manufactured home parks shall be located only in a designated manufactured home park subarea of an approved planned industrial district development plan, and shall be developed according to the standards and regulations stated and referenced herein. 
(c)  General Standards for Manufactured Home Parks. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council shall, in their review of manufactured home parks in planned industrial districts, shall review the particular facts and circumstances of the proposed manufactured home park development in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence that each such development meets these standards: 
(1)  The proposed park will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, drainage, refuse disposal, schools, police and fire protection, or that the persons or agencies proposing the establishment of the park shall be able to provide any such services adequately. 
(2)  The vehicular approaches to the proposed park property will be so designed as not to create traffic interference or congestion on surrounding public streets or roads. 
(3)  The establishment of the proposed park will not result in the damage, destruction, or loss of any natural, scenic, or historic feature of significance. 
(4)  The establishment of the proposed park shall not be detrimental to the value of surrounding properties or to the character of the adjacent neighborhoods. 
(5)  A 60 foot deep dense shrubbery and tree screen shall be provided at the perimeter of a manufactured home park where it abuts a residence, a residentially zoned district, or a residential area of a planned district. 
1147.06 - SWIMMING POOLS. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section, to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of swimming pool facilities which are constructed, operated or maintained as an accessory use. 
(b)  Private Swimming Pools. No private swimming pool, exclusive of portable swimming pools with a diameter of less than 12 feet or with an area of less than 100 square feet, or a farm pond, shall be allowed in any residential district or commercial district except as an accessory use, and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The pool is intended to be used and is used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the property on which it is located and their guests. 
(2)  The pool may be located anywhere on the premises except in required front yards, provided that it shall not be located closer than 12 feet to any property line or easement. 
(3)  The swimming pool, or the entire property upon which it is located, shall be walled or fenced in such a manner as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street and from adjacent properties. 
(c)  Community or Club Swimming Pools. A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of property owners, or by a private club or association, for use and enjoyment by members and their families. Such swimming pools shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The pool is intended solely for and is used solely for the enjoyment of the members and families and guests of members of the association or club under whose ownership or jurisdiction the pool is operated. 
(2)  The pool and accessory structures thereto shall not be located closer than 100 fee to any property line or easement. 
(3)  The swimming pool, its accessory facilities, and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties. The said fence or wall shall not be less than six feet in height and maintained in good condition with a gate and lock. The area surrounding the enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, and trees and maintained in good condition. 
(4)  Such pool facilities shall not be operated prior to 9:00 a.m. in the morning or after 10:00 p.m. in the evening. 
1147.07 - LONG-TERM PARKING FACILITIES AS ACCESSORY USES. 
    This section, shall apply to the location and operation of any long-term parking facility as an accessory use. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate long-term parking facilities constructed, operated, or maintained as accessory uses in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Conditional Use Permit Required. No person shall establish, operate or maintain on any premises as an accessory use a parking facility where any vehicles, to include tractors, trailers, boats, campers, recreational vehicles, buses, trucks, or automobiles, are to be parked for a continuous period exceeding six days without obtaining a conditional use permit for such accessory use. 
(c)  Permit Requirements. In addition to complying with all other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, the applicant for the conditional use permit shall give evidence that the premises proposed for such use complies with the following conditions: 
(1)  That no boundary of the proposed parking area is within 50 feet of a residence, a residential district boundary, or a residential area of a planned district. 
(2)  That the proposed parking area will not prevent access to adjacent properties by fire safety equipment. 
(3)  That the proposed parking area will be screened in such a manner that the vehicles thereon parked will not be visible from the ground level of any adjacent residential properties. 
(4)  That fencing and lighting of the facility will be sufficient to provide for its reasonable security. 
(5)  That no service work, maintenance work, repair work, painting work, or other vehicle work shall take place on the premises. 
1147.08 - HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
    This section shall apply to the location, operation, and maintenance of home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of home occupations. It is further the intent of these sections to allow limited non-residential uses in residential structures which are compatible with the residential character of their surroundings. 
(b)  Definition. Home occupation means an accessory use which is an activity, profession, occupation, service, craft, or revenue-enhancing hobby which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and is conducted entirely within the dwelling unit without any significant adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood. Activities such as teaching, tutoring, tax consulting and the like shall involve not more than three receivers of such services at any one time, with the exception of certified or uncertified Type B Family Day-Care Homes, which constitute a residential use and not an accessory use. 
(c)  Home Occupation as a Permitted Use. Home occupations shall be considered a permitted use. A Zoning Certificate shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to establishment of the Home Occupation. Any Home Occupation established without a Zoning Certificate shall be brought into compliance within seven days of written notification by the Zoning Administrator to the property owner of the noncompliance. The criteria for the issuance of a Zoning Certificate for a home occupation are as follows: 
(1)  Activities, materials and equipment associated with the occupation shall be totally maintained within a building. The external appearance of the structure in which the use is conducted shall not be altered. 
(2)  No internal or external alterations, construction, or reconstruction of the premises to accommodate the use shall be permitted. 
(3)  There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the use, and only commodities produced on the premises may be sold on the premises; no display of products may be visible from the street. 
(4)  Not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be devoted to the use, or 50 percent of the combined floor space in any garage and/or accessory building. 
(5)  No equipment, process, materials, chemicals, or storage shall create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, x-rays, radiation, electrical disturbances, electrical interference, fluctuation in voltage, or other nuisance detectable to normal senses off the lot or by off-site customary residential equipment. 
(6)  No additional parking demand, beyond that created by the residence itself, shall be created. 
(7)  No equipment, process or storage associated with the occupation shall create any fire or explosion hazard, or involve the storage or use of hazardous materials in any concentration greater than that which would normally be found in a dwelling containing no home occupation. 
(8)  Not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises may participate in the home occupation as an employee or as a volunteer. 
(9)  Waste materials, solid or liquid, shall not be created on the premises at a level greater than normal to a residential use, unless provisions for the disposition of said wastes are acceptable to the municipality and do not create a burden on adjoining property. 
(10)  Home occupation services may be rendered on the premises or elsewhere. 
(11)  No activity shall be conducted or permitted which creates a nuisance to neighboring properties or otherwise be illegal. 
(d)  Invalidation of Home Occupation Zoning Certificate. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a Zoning Certificate issued for a home occupation shall cease to be valid at such time as the premises for which it was issued is no longer occupied by the holder of said permit. Such Zoning Certificate shall also be immediately invalidated upon the conduct of the home occupation in any manner not approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Home Occupation Fee. A fee for review and approval of a Home Occupation may be established by Council within the Official Fee Schedule as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998) 
1147.09 - GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES. 
    This section shall apply to the location, operation, and maintenance of group residential facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the location, operation, and maintenance of group residential facilities in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. It is the intent of these sections to provide for the assimilation of these facilities in stable and suitable neighborhoods so that the living environments of their residents are conducive to their rehabilitation. 
(b)  Definition. Group residential facility shall mean any community residential facility, licensed and/or approved and regulated by the State of Ohio, which provides rehabilitative or habilitative services. There are two classes of Group Residential Facilities: 
(1)  Class I: Any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a foster home for children or adults (not including nursing homes) or as a home for the care or rehabilitation of dependent or predelinquent children, the physically handicapped or disabled, or those with development disabilities or mental illnesses. A Class I Type A group residential facility contains six or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class I Type B group residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff. 
(2)  Class II: Any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a home for juvenile offenders; a halfway house providing residential care or rehabilitation for adult offenders in lieu of institutional sentencing; a halfway house providing residence for persons leaving correctional institutions; and residential rehabilitation centers for alcohol and drug users, provided detoxification is expressly prohibited on such premises. A Class II Type A group residential facility contains six or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class II Type B group residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff. 
(c)  Conditional Use Permit Required. A Class I Type B group residential facility is permitted by right in any district in which residence is a permitted use. No other group residential facility shall be established, operated or maintained on any premises unless authorized by the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1129. In addition to said provisions, such group residential facilities shall comply with the following conditional use criteria: 
(1)  Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets the certification, licensing, or approval requirements of the appropriate state agency. 
(2)  Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets local fire safety requirements for the proposed use and level of occupancy. 
(3)  Evidence is presented that the proposed facility will not generate an unreasonable increase in traffic volume or require special off-street parking. 
(4)  Such facilities shall comply with the district regulations applicable to other properties in the zoning district in which they are located. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be shaded to prevent casting direct light on adjoining residential property. 
(6)  No such facility may be located within 600 feet of another such facility. 
(7)  No signs shall be erected by such facility for purposes of identification except a permitted street address sign. 
(8)  The exterior of all such facilities shall not be altered in character but shall be compatible with other residential dwellings. New structures shall be compatible in residential design with the surrounding neighborhood. However, any improvement required by code or necessitated by licensing requirements shall not be deemed incompatible. 
(9)  Such facility shall be reasonable accessible, by virtue of its location or transportation provided by the applicant, to medical, recreational, and retail services required by its residents, and to employment opportunities, if applicable, and shall be in a relatively safe and stable neighborhood. 
(10)  The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in which the facility will maintain contact with neighborhood residents, to include a structured procedure whereby their grievances may be filed and resolved. 
(11)  The applicant shall provide documentation indicating the need for the facility, the specific clientele it will serve, and the location and type of similar facilities operated by the applicant. 
(d)  Zoning of Group Residential Facilities. Group residential facilities shall be conditionally permitted uses as follows: 
Class I Type A PI - Planned Industrial District Class I Type B Permitted by right in all districts in which residence is a permitted use. Class II Type A PI - Planned Industrial District Class II Type B PI - Planned Industrial District  
(e)  Variance to Distancing Requirement. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance with respect to the distancing requirement contained in subsection (c)(5) hereof, if the applicant clearly demonstrates that the proposed location has unique advantages with respect to proximity to employment opportunities, social services, public transportation, or similar amenities. 
(f)  Uniformity with Respect to Granting Conditional Use Permits. The granting of conditional use permits for the establishment of Group Residential Facilities shall be uniformly and equitable done, irrespective of considerations beyond the scope of these regulations. 
1147.10 - FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING; DESIGN AND APPEARANCE STANDARDS. 
    This section shall apply to the location, construction, and maintenance of factory-built housing in all districts other than in manufactured home parks. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community by establishing regulations governing the sitting, construction, and maintenance of factory-built housing. It is further the intent of these sections to permit a wider range of housing opportunities while assuring the compatibility of a variety of housing types within certain residential districts. 
(b)  Definitions. Factory-built housing means a factory-built structure designed for long-term residential use, the components of which are essentially constructed or assembled prior to its delivery to and installation upon a site. For the purposes of this section, "factory-built housing" shall include the following: 
(1)  Manufactured home. Any nonself-propelled vehicle transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, and, when erected on site in combination, is 800 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a permanent dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, and which bears a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards. 
(2)  Modular Home. Factory-built housing certified as meeting the building code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to all of the same standards as site-built homes. 
(3)  Mobile home. A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976, or built subsequent to such Act but not certifiable to compliance with it. 
(c)  Siting Requirements. Any factory-built housing proposed to be located in any district shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The structure shall be installed upon and properly attached to a foundation system that provides adequate support of the structure's vertical and horizontal loads and transfers these and other imposed forces, without failure, from the structure to the undisturbed ground below the frost line. 
(2)  All hitches, axles, wheels, and conveyance mechanisms shall be removed from the structure. 
(3)  The structure shall be so oriented on the site that its long axis is parallel with the street, and it shall have an entranceway facing the street, except where diagonal placement and the addition of a garage, carport, or other accessory structure may be permitted by subdivision regulation and yard requirement. 
(4)  The site shall be suitably landscaped, with adequate screening devices as elsewhere required. 
(5)  The sitting of the structure shall comply with all yard and setback requirements in effect for the district for which it is proposed. 
(6)  The structure shall comply with all of the physical requirements of minimum floor area, building height, exterior materials, roof type and materials, etc., as established for residences in the district in which it is located. 
(7)  The sitting of the structure shall comply with all parking requirements in effect for the district for which it is proposed. 
(8)  The site shall be serviced by utilities in such manner as required by Ordinance. 
(d)  Zoning of Factory-Built Housing. 
(1)  Mobile homes shall be permitted only in approved mobile home parks, located as elements of an approved planned district development plan in a planned industrial district. 
(2)  Manufactured homes and modular homes which meet the design and appearance standards contained in subsection (c) hereof, shall be permitted uses is all zoning districts in which residence is a permitted use and in which all district regulations have been met. 
(e)  Uniformity with Respect to Granting of Variances. The granting of variances from the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance with respect to the sitting of single-family home structures, their design or appearance, shall be uniformly and equitably done, irrespective of the fact that the structure proposed for such sitting is a site-built structure, modular, or manufactured home, and shall be guided by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
1147.11 - AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES. 
(a)  Animals. No animal, except household pets, shall be kept on any parcel of less than five acres. This subsection shall apply only to those parcels where the total land holdings of the using party, in one contiguous unit, is five acres or less and shall not be construed to apply to individual pens, pastures or fields of less than five acres if they are a part of a larger contiguous tract of land of five acres or more devoted to agricultural use. 
(Ord. No. 01-60, 11-6-2001) 
1147.12 - PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL CHARACTER. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect and promote the residential and environmental character of the Municipality of Powell, and thus protect and promote the welfare of the residents and community property values. 
(b)  Standards. All new or existing residences or all types of buildings in R-Residence Districts, DR-Downtown Residence District, DB-Downtown Business District, PR-Planned Residence Districts, PRC Planned Residential Conservation District, PC-Planned Commercial District, PO-Planned Office District, and all new multi-family residential units in P-I Planned Industrial Districts, shall have: 
(1)  All exterior walls shall consist of natural wood lap siding, cement-fiber lap siding, brick, stone, artificial stone, or stucco. Cement fiber siding is hereby defined as not being a natural material. 
(2)  The use of horizontal cement-fiber lap siding shall be limited to any type that closely resembles the grain and texture of real cedar wood horizontal lap siding or any other type approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Smooth textured siding shall be appropriate only within the Downtown District Overlay District. 
(3)  The maximum exposure for horizontal lap siding shall be eight inches in width. 
(4)  Pitched, gable, or hipped roofs; 
(5)  A minimum 7:12 primary roof pitch shall be required for new residences to be constructed as a result of Planned District Development Plans approved under this ordinance, unless otherwise determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1147.13 - SEASONAL SALES. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of seasonal sales. 
(b)  Seasonal Sales Defined. "Seasonal Sales" means any activity involving the sale of seasonal related products such as the sale of pumpkins, christmas trees, agricultural related products, and other seasonal goods or merchandise. The outdoor display of merchandise for sale by local businesses on their property is not regulated by this section. 
(c)  Seasonal Sales as a Permitted Use. Seasonal sales conducted by those other than a not-for-profit religious, public institutional, or local civic group or organization are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. Seasonal sales conducted by a not-for-profit religious, public institutional, or local civic group or organization are permitted on property owned or leased by said group or organization in any district. A zoning certificate shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to establishment of any seasonal sales area. Any seasonal sales area established without a zoning certificate shall be brought into compliance within two days of written notification by the Zoning Administrator. The criteria for the issuance of a zoning certificate are as follows: 
(1)  If seasonal sales are to be conducted in a parking lot, not more than 25 percent of the total parking spaces where the said seasonal sales area is to be located shall be devoted to the use otherwise not more than 50 percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to the use. 
(2)  No portion of said seasonal sales area shall be placed on any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way without approval from the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  The use does not create adverse effects on traffic movement and parking within the site location and the surrounding community. 
(4)  No permanent buildings or structures will be erected. 
(5)  Sufficient lighting shall be provided. If the site location does not already have sufficient lighting to be utilized, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator. Lighting shall not shine directly or indirectly over neighboring property lines. 
(6)  The seasonal sales area does not utilize more than one sign. This sign must be portable and of the "A"-frame type. No sign shall exceed 16 square feet in surface area per side. 
(7)  The zoning certificate is for a period not longer than 60 days. No more than three zoning certificates shall be granted for the same or substantially the same seasonal sales area in a calendar year. Further, no more than two of said zoning certificates shall be consecutive. 
(8)  Upon the expiration of the zoning certificate, the premises shall be left in a clean and sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator within seven days following the date of expiration. A refundable deposit shall be submitted with the zoning certificate fee to ensure compliance with this clean up requirement. 
(Ord. No. 01-59, 11-6-2001) 
1147.14 - RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of recreational structures. 
(b)  Recreational Structure Defined. A "recreational structure" means any structure used for recreational activity. Recreational structures include, but are not limited to, basketball goals, goal nets, backstops, trampolines, half-pipes, quarter pipes, ramps, and playground equipment. The Zoning Administrator may decide what will be determined to be a recreational structure. See Section 1147.06 for regulations on swimming pools. 
(c)  Prohibited from Public Right of Way and Easements. Due to issues of public safety, both vehicular and pedestrian, created by the location of recreational structures in the public right of way and some easements, recreational structures are prohibited from being located in any public right of way and/or easement designated for the purpose of public access. 
(d)  Basketball Goals. Basketball goals may be erected in the front yard. Basketball goals attached to poles are permitted alongside the driveway as long as the pole is set back at least two feet from the side property line and five feet from the front property line. 
(e)  Recreational Structures Prohibited in Front Yard. Due to issues of blighting and reduction of property values created by the location of recreational structures in front yards, recreational structures, except basketball goals as stated in subsection (d) above, are prohibited from being located in the front yard. 
(f)  Rear and Side Yard Setbacks Established. Due to issues of blighting, the reduction of property values and the possible destruction of property created by the location of recreational structures in the side and rear yard, no recreational structure may be located in any required side yard setback or closer than a distance of five feet from any rear property line. 
(g)  Additional Requirements. The construction, erection, or placement of any recreational court or surface, such as but not limited to, a basketball court, tennis court or "sport court," shall require a zoning certificate and not be located in any front yard, or front or side yard setback or closer than 15 feet to any rear property line. No recreational structure shall impede proper drainage of any property. 
(h)  Maintenance. All recreational structures shall be maintained in good repair and shall be structurally sound. Any grounds that surround any recreational structure shall be maintained in a neat, clean and well cared for condition at all times. 
(i)  Deed Restrictions and Covenants. Be aware that private deed restriction and covenants may have additional requirements that need to be met and may be enforced by others such as individuals or homeowner associations. 
(j)  Effective Date. Due to the public health, safety and welfare issued addressed in this section, the location of any recreational structure within the public right of way of any street or any other public access easement is strictly prohibited and the requirements of subsection (c) hereof shall be effective toward all existing and future recreational structures upon the effective date of this section. Any recreational structure otherwise installed at the effective date of this section is allowed to remain as installed. Any new recreational structure installed, or any existing recreational structure added on to or relocated after the effective date of this section, shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-63, 1-7-2003) 
1147.15 - LARGE NON-RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of Large Non-Residential Establishments. It is the intent of this section to regulate Large Non-Residential Establishments so as to prevent the erosion of the residential character of the City of Powell and to promote the small, greenbelt community character of the City and its surroundings as described in the Comprehensive Plan. Large Non-Residential Establishments have been commonly accepted as having potential for creating negative impacts upon the City's existing economy, surrounding residential areas, traffic, public safety, and the efforts of the City to maintain the small, greenbelt community character in the face of development pressures being experienced by the City and the entire Southern Delaware County region. Because of the substantial adverse effects that Large Non-Residential Establishments can have based upon their size, bulk, scale, use, noise and traffic generation, among other effects, there is no general presumption that an application for such a use at a particular location is valid, is compatible with surrounding uses, inures to the general benefit of the City or is in compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. Instead, each application will be evaluated according to its specific development plan, particular location and the degree to which the developer is willing or able to ameliorate the adverse impacts of the proposed development and incorporate a mixed-use element (residential and non-residential) into the overall development plan for the property, where appropriate. Except as provided herein, Large Non-Residential Establishments are not permitted within the City. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Large non-residential establishment includes any structure with more than 35,000 square feet in non-residential usable floor area. Religious, educational, and public uses shall be excluded from this definition and these requirements. 
(2)  Liner building is a building located along a Large Non-Residential Establishment to mask blank or unadorned walls and may either be attached to the Large Non-Residential Establishment or placed a maximum of 25 feet from it. 
(c)  Limitation. No single retail sales, general business, service business or wholesale business use within a Large Non-Residential Establishment shall exceed 65,000 square feet in usable floor area. No more than one user in any large non residential establishment shall exceed 35,000 square feet. Any Large Non-Residential Establishment shall be separated from another Large Non-Residential Establishment by the minimum amount of building separation required within that zoning district. The maximum size of any one structure within a development plan containing a Large Non-Residential Establishment is 120,000 square feet. 
(d)  Special Use Permit Required. No Large Non-Residential Establishment shall be erected, constructed, or developed and no existing non-residential building shall be reconstructed, remodeled, arranged, or enlarged to become a Large Non-Residential Establishment unless a special use permit is approved as a part of a Planned District Development Plan as required by Section 1143.11, and in accordance with the following special use criteria: 
(1)  If the Large Non-Residential Establishment is part of a larger development plan including out parcels or additional structures, these requirements shall apply to all buildings or structures within the development. 
(2)  Large Non-Residential Establishments shall be located within a Planned District, and shall meet the requirements of this Section 1147.15 or those of the Planned District within which the Large Non-Residential Establishment is located, whichever requirement is more restrictive. 
(3)  Within the Planned District Development Plan for the property on which a Large Non-Residential Establishment is proposed, the provision for residential uses shall be encouraged, and may be required, by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to provide for a mixed-use development scheme. This may lessen the need for such intense commercial development and reduce the overall impact on the community. 
(4)  Any Large Non-Residential Establishment shall have access to a major arterial roadway, as defined in the Delaware County Thoroughfare Plan, such as Home Road, Sawmill Parkway and State Route 750. This access can be direct or via internal streets connecting to the major arterial. Internal streets are those provided, public or private, within the confines of the development plan. External streets are those streets either adjacent to or away from the confines of the proposed development plan that are not major arterials. Whenever a large retail establishment has an additional access to a secondary or non-major arterial roadway, the main point of ingress and egress shall be at the intersection with the major arterial roadway. Landscaping, signage, internal circulation patterns and other measures shall be incorporated to direct vehicles to the main point of ingress and egress. 
(5)  A Preliminary Community Impact Analysis is required to be submitted as part of the Planned District Preliminary Development Plan (the "Project"). Following input from the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Staff, a Final Community Impact Analysis shall be submitted with the Planned District Final Development Plan. 
A.  The Preliminary Community Impact Analysis shall be based on the requirements of the Final Community Impact Analysis and include, in summary form: 
1.  A description of the proposed Project and its design features, including existing conditions on the site and in the vicinity of the Project. 
2.  Identification and assessment of the impacts of proposed Project, including positive, negative, and indirect impacts. 
3.  An evaluation of how the Project will meet the design standards required in this Section 1147.15. 
4.  Proposed measures to mitigate adverse impacts and/or maximize positive impact including design modifications and provision of infrastructure or public service improvements sufficient to support the Project. Any adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated shall be identified. Mitigation measures to be implemented by the applicant shall be identified. 
B.  The Final Community Impact Analysis shall assess the following areas of potential impact. 
1.  Existing Physical Conditions. Describe the existing physical and ecological characteristics of the site and how the project impacts the site and surrounding land. Include topography, slope, soils, wetlands, surface water, vernal pools, flood plains, depth to groundwater, drainage patterns, type and coverage of vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, identification of known rare or endangered plant or animal species, relationships to public or private water supply wells and recharge areas or public water supply reservoirs. 
2.  Existing Surrounding Conditions. Describe the surrounding neighborhood and any scenic, unique geological, historical, or archeological features and recreational areas on the site or in the vicinity of the site which could be affected by the Project. Identify the impacts to historic properties, districts, or areas, and any archaeological sites on the property or in the vicinity of the Project. Consultation with the Powell- Liberty Historical Society is required if structures pre-dating 1940 are evident. 
3.  Project Description. Describe the layout of the proposed Project in detail (site plans may be used) including scale, placement, and design of buildings and structures; lighting; parking areas; open space; relationship to scenic views from the site; views of the Project from adjacent properties and public ways. Evaluate the proposed architectural design in relationship to surrounding land uses and prevailing architectural style including major design elements such as scale, materials, color, setbacks, and roof lines. Describe any recreational facilities proposed for the site and any provision for public recreational or open spaces. Describe any existing local plans and policies and how the proposed Project relates to those plans and policies. 
4.  Market Analysis. Evaluate the market and financial feasibility of the Project. Include any market studies prepared for the Project and any plans for phased construction. Discuss the trade service area of the Project, the need for the Project at the proposed location, and the ability of the trade service area to support the Project. 
5.  Traffic Analysis. This analysis shall include a review of existing traffic conditions including the following: average daily and peak hour volumes, sight distances, street capacity, level of service, physical characteristics of the streets, number and location of driveways and intersections, average and peak speeds, accident data, pedestrian movement, and traffic controls for streets and intersections adjacent to the Project; a review of impacts on streets and intersections which will experience an increase in peak hour traffic as a result of the Project or which will experience a reduction in the level of service as a result of the Project; a review of impacts on failing streets and intersections (as determined by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator) which will experience an increase in traffic due to the impacts of this development. The traffic analysis shall also include a review of projected traffic conditions including the following; average daily and peak hour traffic projections and directional distribution of site generated traffic (background traffic conditions for the design year including any planned roadway/traffic improvements and other proposed projects in the vicinity of the site), sight distances at proposed driveway intersections with streets, on-site traffic circulation and parking layout, pedestrian movement, and projected traffic impact evaluating how the proposed Project will affect traffic conditions and streets and intersections adjacent to and those likely to be affected by the proposed Project including level of service, traffic flow, turning movements, sight distances, traffic controls, pedestrian movement, and public transportation. 
6.  Water. Describe and submit to Del-Co Water Company the proposed water supply system. A letter from the Del-Co Water Company stating feasibility of service to the development is required. 
7.  Sanitary Sewer. Describe and submit to the Delaware County Sanitary Engineer the proposed sewage disposal system. A letter from the Delaware County Sanitary Engineer stating feasibility of service is required. 
8.  Storm Drainage. Describe the proposed surface drainage system including pre and post runoff calculations; the location, sizing, accessibility, and proposed discharges to the City storm system. Evaluate the capacity of the existing storm system to accommodate projected storm water runoff. Estimate the cost and discuss the responsibility for construction of storm drain improvements and on-going maintenance. Specifically evaluate the impact of storm water, runoff, flooding, erosion, sedimentation, grading changes, increased impervious surface, discharges to groundwater, pumping of groundwater, wetlands disruption, and changes to vegetative cover. Provide the location and results of any test pits, soil borings, and percolation tests performed on the site. Consultation with the City Engineer is required. 
9.  Waste. Describe the quantity and composition of projected solid wastes to be generated by the Project including average weekly volume in cubic yards of refuse generated; recycling potential; method of on-site storage and collection. Describe the types, quantities, use and storage methods for hazardous materials and wastes to be used or generated by the Project. What measures will be taken to prevent a release into the environment? Describe impacts on nearby areas, especially residential areas, and include timing provisions for removal of solid and hazardous wastes to prevent overflow and nuisances created by wastes. 
10.  Police and Fire and other City Services. Describe the anticipated fire and police protection needs; provision for alarms or warning devices and private security; on-site firefighting and security capabilities; need for increased municipal personnel or equipment. Consultation with the City of Powell Police Department and Liberty Township Fire Department is required. 
11.  Quality of Life. Identify and evaluate the potential impacts of the Project on noise levels on-site and off-site which will be affected by the Project 
12.  Employment. Estimate the number and types of jobs to be created by the Project, estimate the amount of local labor to be used 
13.  Impact on Surrounding Communities. Estimate the amount, type, and location of spin-off development resulting from construction of the Project and its likely impact on the community including changing land use patterns, development pressure on surrounding neighborhoods, impact to the downtown business district. Identify and evaluate the potential impacts to neighboring communities resulting from the Project. 
14.  Financial Impact. Evaluate the projected costs and benefits to the community resulting from the Project including: 
a.  Projected short-term and long-term costs arising from increased demand for and required improvements to public services and infrastructure. 
b.  Value of improvements to public services and infrastructure to be provided by the Project. 
c.  Projected short-term and long-term tax revenues to be generated by the Project. This includes property tax, real property tax, and income tax based upon projected employment or known employment factors and business structure within the development. 
15.  Mitigation and Enhancement. Describe proposed mitigation measures for negative impacts identified above and how positive impacts will be enhanced to better benefit the community. 
C.  The following standards shall be applied by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council when reviewing the Community Impact Analysis: 
1.  Existing Physical and Surrounding Conditions. Provision shall be made for preserving historical features of the site. The Project shall be compatible with the character and scale of neighboring properties especially historic structures or areas. 
2.  Proposed Project. Building materials, architecture, and building placement shall minimize the visibility of a Large Non-Residential Establishment, including architectural appurtenances (clock towers, etc.), in order to, minimize obstruction of scenic views visible from public ways, and ensure compatibility with neighboring properties. However, incorporation of outstanding building design and siting that creates the formation of a community landmark is encouraged. Project siting and design shall be consistent with the Planned Commercial Development Design Guide. 
3.  Traffic Analysis. Level of Service shall be determined in accordance with the most recent standards adopted by the Ohio Department of Transportation. The design goal for all streets, signalized intersections, and turning movements at un-signalized intersections shall be LOS C or better. For streets and intersections currently functioning at LOS C or better, mitigation measures shall be provided to maintain or improve the existing LOS. Where the existing LOS is D or worse, mitigation measures shall, where feasible upgrade the LOS to C or better. Driveways shall be located to limit conflict points with existing driveways and intersections and shall meet intersection design standards as established by the City Engineer. Shared driveways and service roads shall be used to control access onto existing streets. The impact of increased turning movements shall be mitigated. The Project shall be sited and driveways located to discourage routing of non-residential traffic to and through residential streets. Where possible, pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation and shall be an integral part of the overall plan. 
4.  Water, Sanitary Sewer, and Storm Drainage and Waste. The public water, sewer, and drainage systems in the vicinity of the site shall be adequate to serve the proposed Project. If public utilities are not adequate to serve the Project, the reviewing authority may require, as a condition of approval, off-site improvements to increase the capacity of such utilities sufficient to serve the Project. All utilities shall be placed underground where physically feasible. All commercial and industrial discharges to the sewage treatment plant shall be pretreated if required by the Delaware County Sanitary Engineer to prevent overloading of the treatment plant. All discharges shall be in compliance with the Delaware County Sanitary Engineer. On-site storm water management measures shall be required to ensure that the rate of runoff from the site to the public storm sewer is not increased as determined by the City Engineer. Provision shall be made for on-going maintenance of on-site storm water management facilities connected to the public storm system. The development of on-site storm water retention ponds shall be done in a manner which adds to the overall design of the site and if possible be designed to be utilized within publicly accessed open spaces within the development plan. Waste storage, siting and removal shall be mitigated to minimize significant negative sensory input (odor, sound, etc.) 
5.  Police and Fire and Other City Services. Services shall not be strained by the proposed Project. Adequate fire flows shall be available at the site. Improvements to the water system may be required. Alternatives owned, maintained or contracted by the landowner may be required. 
6.  Quality of Life and Ecological. The Project shall not create any significant emission of noise, dust, fumes, noxious gases, radiation, water pollutants, or any similar significant adverse environmental impact. The Project shall not cause erosion, flooding, sedimentation, or increase the rate of runoff from the site. Provision shall be made for attenuation of runoff pollutants. Groundwater recharge shall be provided where the City deems it important. The Project shall be designed to minimize the destruction of wetlands, unique natural features, wildlife habitat, and known rare or endangered species. Special effort shall be made to maintain wetlands, wetland buffer zones and corridors between wetlands and wooded uplands; wildlife travel corridors; existing diversity of plant communities; and to avoid alteration of areas most difficult to replicate. The Project shall not result in a reduction of groundwater recharge, deteriorate surface or groundwater, or negatively impact any public water supply recharge area or watershed. Commercial and industrial discharges of process waste water to the ground shall not be permitted. Best available measures shall be used to prevent a discharge or spill of hazardous materials or wastes into the environment. Buffers, setbacks, landscaping, and traffic circulation patterns shall be used to mitigate noise, water, and air pollution impacts. 
7.  Financial and Economic. Adverse impact to the downtown business district shall be minimized through the use of joint marketing or other measures by collaboration with the current downtown business association. The trade service area shall be able to support the proposed development. The proposed Project shall not have an adverse impact, and should ideally provide a positive impact, on the City in terms of balancing the projected cost of public services and public revenue provided through taxes and other income. The City may require phasing of the Project to minimize negative fiscal impacts to the City over the short term. The Project shall be designed to minimize any negative impacts to adjoining property values. The applicant shall demonstrate the financial ability to complete the Project and to achieve long-term financial stability. The applicant is encouraged, and the City supports, the exploration of financing alternatives such as Tax Increment Financing (TIF) or Business Improvement Districts (BID). 
(6)  The number of parking spaces provided shall be kept to a minimum. Unless demonstrated by the applicant through studies, actual data, or other documentation, the maximum number of parking spaces provided shall not exceed the minimum of the required amount of parking as determined in Chapter 1149. 
(7)  No more than 40 percent of the required off-street parking for the entire property may be placed between the front facade of the building and the primary abutting street unless the building and/or parking lots are screened from view by outlot development (such as restaurants, offices, or other non-residential uses), tree and shrub landscaping, and landscaped mounding. Parking shall be distributed around the Large Non-Residential Establishment with peak and employee parking located to the sides and rear. In the event out parcels are included in the development plan, a majority of the parking shall be located to the sides and rear of the out parcel structure. 
(8)  Parking shall be divided into parking pods that do not exceed 80 parking spaces, have a maximum of four points of ingress and egress, and be interconnected whenever possible. Each parking pod shall be surrounded on all sides by a green space buffer no less than ten feet in width, excepting ingress and egress points. The green space buffer shall incorporate a hedge or other landscaping providing 80 percent year round opacity from ground level to three feet above ground level. Shade trees shall be provided every 40 feet on center or in groupings if found by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be more appropriate. This provision shall not inhibit sight lines necessary for safe vehicular and pedestrian movement. Requirements of this provision may be adjusted by the Planning and Zoning Commission if alternative designs are deemed superior. All other landscaping requirements found elsewhere in the Planning and Zoning Code shall be applicable. 
(9)  Buildings shall have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce massive aesthetic effects, and recognize local character on all sides of a building. The following architectural design criteria must be met on all sides of any structure (Please reference the Planned Commercial Development Design Guide for layout and design recommendations that help to meet these criteria): 
A.  Facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no less than 60 feet horizontally or 14 feet vertically. 
1.  Color change. 
2.  Texture change. 
3.  Material change. 
4.  Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 36 inches in width and depth, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. 
B.  Facades that are visible from a public right-of-way or parking area must incorporate windows, awnings, verandas, entry areas, or other such elements, individually or in combination, across the entire facade. 
C.  Windows shall be recessed and include prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing. 
D.  The use of false facades, windows, doors, and other elements are encouraged where necessary to break massing and promote a pedestrian scale. 
E.  Entryway design elements and variations shall give orientation, aesthetically pleasing character, and pedestrian scale to the building. Each building shall have a highly visible customer entrance featuring architectural elements, which may include any combination of the following; overhangs, recesses and projections, verandas, arches, landscaped areas with places for pedestrian seating, architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design, peaked roof form, tower elements, canopies or porticos, night lighting, and other similar features. 
F.  Variations in roof lines shall be used to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of large buildings. Roof features must compliment the character of adjoining neighborhoods. Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment from public view. 
G.  Building materials and colors must be aesthetically pleasing and similar to the surrounding community. 
H.  Liner Buildings are encouraged and may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission along a Large Non-Residential Structure. Liner Buildings are subject to the requirements of this section as well as the following: 
1.  The Liner Building shall cover a minimum of 75 percent of the large non-residential faade the liner building is masking. Emphasis shall be placed on separating buildings and uses surrounding the entire Large Non-Residential Establishment. It is the intent to provide flexibility in layout and design rather than just blanket cover 75 percent of the Large Non-Residential Establishment faade. 
2.  The street level faade of all Liner Buildings shall be no less than 70 percent transparent between the height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade. 
3.  When feasible, the entrance to the Large Non-Residential Establishment shall be incorporated into the Liner Building design. 
(10)  Pedestrian circulation and connectivity is required. To promote development at a pedestrian scale that is user-friendly and safe, the following requirements must be met: 
A.  Bikepaths at least eight feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public or private right-of-way. 
B.  Internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided from the bikepath along all public and private rights-of-way to the entrance of all buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of their length. 
C.  Sidewalks, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring an entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least five feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade. 
D.  Internal pedestrian walkways provided in conformance with subsection C. above, shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades at all public entrances, constructed parallel to the facade of the building. This is not intended to extend into the driving aisles or parking areas. 
E.  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Signs shall be installed to designate pedestrian walkways. 
F.  Pedestrian ways shall be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. The features and spaces should enhance the building and the center as integral parts of the community. 
G.  Bike racks shall be provided at various points within the proposed development where they are appropriate to public spaces and entrances to users. 
(11)  Garbage collection areas, HVAC equipment, utility meters, loading areas and other such functions shall be incorporated into the overall design and screened from view from any public and private right-of-way. The location and screening of such areas shall minimize the visual and acoustic impacts of such functions. Such screening shall provide eighty (80) percent year round opacity. Where feasible, loading and service areas shall be screened with walls incorporated into the design of the building and located as far as possible from the nearest residential area. 
(12)  Along all public rights-of-way a white three rail fence shall be provided with street tree plantings every 40 feet on center or in groupings of trees along the rights-of-way. The landscaping and buffering requirements found elsewhere in the Planning and Zoning Code shall apply. 
(13)  Notwithstanding other requirements within other sections of this code, the total amount of open space or landscaped areas shall be 30 percent of the gross amount of land within the planned district development plan. That means no more than 70 percent of impervious surface is allowed on the site. The maximum total lot coverage by any building(s) is 20 percent of the lot after any required dedication of road rights-of-way. 
(14)  Any open or public space shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least four of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, window shopping walkways, outdoor play area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower, steeple, or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission, adequately enhances such community and public spaces. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. Additionally, any storm water detaining area not contained within a parking area shall be made to retain water and be incorporated into the overall design and use of the development. 
(15)  All outdoor shopping cart collection areas shall be located next to required landscaped parking bays and positioned and landscaped in a manner to minimize the view from public and private rights-of-way. 
(16)  Outdoor storage, except for the temporary storage of shopping carts in collection areas, is prohibited. Outdoor displays of merchandise shall be removed nightly. 
(17)  Exterior lighting, both building lighting and site lighting, shall minimize the impact of ambient light on the surrounding community. A lighting plan is required showing the design and location of all fixtures. Included with the plan shall be a photometric drawing showing, in foot-candles, the light spread from each fixture. All fixtures shall be decorative and incorporated into the overall design of the development. Ambient light shall be minimized and all fixtures shall be equipped with a full cut-off shield and directed downward. No light shall be mounted higher than 18 feet above grade. Lighting is required at any intersection. Only at intersections with public streets is it permissible for any light to spill across the property line. In the event a business is to be opened between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., a minimum amount of lighting necessary for security and safety, which shall be identified by the lighting plan, shall be permitted to remain on during those hours. 
(18)  If a single user intends to occupy 35,000 or more square feet of the Large Non-Residential Establishment, an adaptive re-use concept must be submitted and approved by the owner and the City. It is intended here that the building be designed to allow for possible future users in space that is divided from the original size user space. Factors to include in the design shall be future window and door openings, multiple loading and service provisions, and future utilities. An adaptive re-use agreement shall be entered into by the owner and the City and provide, among other things, (a) an approved concept for how the Large Non-Residential Establishment can be re-used if the single user ceases normal operations at the Large Non-Residential Establishment. Such agreement shall be recorded in the public records with the Delaware County Recorder's office. 
(19)  Deliveries and service functions shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2009-13, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1147.16 - PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTER. 
    The City of Powell has several provisions within its codified ordinances that help to preserve and protect its community environmental character, which provisions are set forth below to facilitate the identification and application of such provisions to all lands within the City of Powell that have these environmental characteristics. 
(a)  Floodplain Regulations are found at Chapter 1305. 
(b)  Tree Preservation and Replacement Policy is found at Section 1145.29(c) and (d). 
(c)  Drainage regulations are found in Section 1145.25. 
(d)  Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Olentangy River Watershed Permit Requirements: 
(1)  Portions of the City of Powell that are within the Olentangy River Watershed are subject to the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Special Olentangy River Watershed Permit requirements. These requirements can be found at the following web site (current to 2017): 
http://epa.ohio.gov/dsw/permits/GP_ConstructionSiteStormWater_Olentangy.aspx#153884563-permit-documents 
(e)  Areas of high slope greater than 12 percent are a special consideration for design and construction. New construction should avoid areas of high slope. Retaining walls of no greater than four feet shall be utilized as a way to overcoming slope considerations when designing structures, driveways, sidewalks or other site development related items. Slope preservation techniques, including but not limited to pier design or bridges, shall be utilized as alternatives to slope clearing, grading and retaining walls greater than four feet high in any location along a slope. 
(f)  Wetlands are an important part of the local environmental condition. The requirements of the State of Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall be complied with as part of any new development within the City of Powell. 
(g)  Streams and riparian corridors shall be protected through the establishment of a Stream Corridor Protection Zone. The delineation, protection, and use of this zone shall be as described in the City of Columbus Storm Water Drainage Manual (current edition 2017), Section 1, from the beginning to Section 1.3, inclusive and as amended going forward. The City Engineer reserves the right to exempt some development areas from this regulation provided that best engineering judgement is used to protect property from flooding and/or erosion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1149 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[22] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference- Parking generally, Ch. 351 
State Law reference- Off-street parking facilities, O.R.C.  717.05 et seq. 

1149.01 - PURPOSE. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth rules to be adhered to in the provision of off-street parking spaces and loading facilities in order to assure orderly and uncongested development through which the general welfare of the citizens of the Municipality of Powell will be protected and enhanced. These development standards apply throughout the Municipality. In the event of conflict between these standards and any more restrictive standards prescribed in an individual Zoning District or in any approved planned development plan, the provisions of the more restrictive requirements shall prevail. The standards set forth herein are to be considered the minimum standards that are to be met in any zoning or rezoning action, and any subsequent approval of a planned development. 
1149.02 - COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  In all districts, including planned districts, at any time that any building, structure, or use of the land is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity, initially used, or changed in use, there shall be provided for every use those off-street parking spaces for automobiles and off-street loading facilities as required herein in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever a building or use is constructed or established, or changed in any way, or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces or those provided for in an approved planned development plan, or to require an off-street loading facility where such does not currently exist, such spaces and/or loading facilities shall be provided in accord with this chapter on the basis of the enlargement or change. 
1149.03 - SUBMISSION OF A PARKING/LOADING FACILITIES PLAN. 
    A parking/loading facilities plan, as a separate item for submission, shall be required for all uses except for single-family and two-family detached residential uses. The parking/loading facility plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as a part of the application for a zoning permit. As a minimum, this plan shall show on a plan drawn to scale: 
(a)  The general location of the property in relation to surrounding streets, properties, buildings and uses; 
(b)  The boundaries of the property; 
(c)  Existing and proposed buildings and uses on the site including their extent and nature relative to the specified conditions generative of facility needs; 
(d)  Parking spaces, aisles, and loading facilities that are proposed to meet these needs; 
(e)  Access driveways; 
(f)  On-site and off-site circulation patterns; 
(g)  Parking/loading area drainage; 
(h)  Parking/loading facility construction plans and typical details; 
(i)  Details of the location and nature of boundary walls, wheel blocks, stall and lane striping patterns, fences, landscaping, and screening; 
(j)  Details of lighting facilities to be provided; 
(k)  Expected pedestrian flow patterns from parking spaces to destinations with walk facilities to accommodate same, and 
(l)  Enumeration data, each parking stall being numbered, with a total number of parking stalls provided on the site noted and parking row capacities noted at the end of each row of spaces. 
1149.04 - QUALITATIVE ASPECTS OF PARKING FACILITY DESIGN. 
(a)  It is expected that parking/loading facility plans shall exhibit best efforts toward the design of the total area for such facilities in such a manner as to create smaller, defined parking lot areas in lieu of a single, unbroken paved lot. 
(b)  It is required that adequate landscaping be provided to delineate or accent parking, pedestrian, and bicycle areas. It is further required that earth mounding be used to integrate paved areas with the surrounding natural environment. 
1149.05 - OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS. 
    All off-street parking facilities, including entrances, exits, maneuvering areas, and parking spaces shall be provided in accord with the following standards and specifications. 
(a)  Parking Space Dimensions: Each off-street parking space shall have dimensions and shall be served by aisle widths that are no less than the following dimensions, and shall all be of usable shape and condition: 
Minimum 
Stall Width Minimum 
Length Minimum 
Aisle Width (1)  90-degree angle parking 9' 19' 22' (2)  parallel parking 10' 23' 14' (3)  60-degree angle parking 10' 19' 20' (4)  45-degree angle parking 10' 20' 20'  
(b)  Access: There shall be adequate provision for easy and safe ingress and access to all parking spaces. Where the lot or parking spaces do not provide direct access to a public street or alley, an access drive shall be provided, with a dedicated easement of access if necessary, as follows: 
(1)  For one single-, two- or three-family residential structure, the access drive shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
(2)  For a combined driveway serving two single-family residences, side-by-side, the access drive shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width. 
(3)  For all other uses, the access drive shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
(4)  Additional access drive width may be required in planned districts where the nature of the uses served and their intensity are deemed to require additional lanes or lane widths for safe operation of the accessway. 
(5)  All parking spaces, except those required single-family or two-family dwellings, shall have access to a public street or alley in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or into a public street or alley shall be traveling in a forward motion. 
(c)  Setbacks: 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities may be located in required side and rear yards as specified elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  Except for single-family and two-family residences, no parking shall be permitted in a required front yard. 
(3)  In no case, however, shall any part of a parking area be located closer than 15 feet to any public street or alley. 
(4)  Nor shall any part of a parking facility for more than five vehicles be located closer than 15 feet to a residentially zoned property, and such a facility shall not be located closer than three feet to a nonresidentially zoned property. 
(5)  No part of a parking facility shall be located closer than 20 feet to any existing dwelling unit, school, hospital, or to any institution for human care, that is located on an adjacent lot. 
(d)  Screening: In addition to the setback requirements specified in this Zoning Ordinance for off-street parking facilities for more than five vehicles, screening shall be provided on each side of the parking area that abuts any existing residence or any residential district. Such screening shall comply with the requirements of Section 1145.29. 
(e)  Paving: All required parking spaces, together with their driveways, accessways, aisles, and other circulation areas, shall be hard-surfaced with an all-weather surfaced pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder, provided, however, that variances for parking related to school auditoria, assembly areas, sports fields and other such community meeting or recreation areas may be granted, provided that paved areas are provided for all daily use parking areas. Where paving is not required, proper dust control measures shall be undertaken and maintained. 
(f)  Drainage: All parking spaces, together with driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or on such areas, and shall be designed to prevent the excess drainage of surface water onto adjacent properties, walkways, or onto the public streets. Adequate arrangements shall be made to assure acceptable diversion to an adequate storm water drainageway or system. 
(g)  Wheel Blocks: Where the extension of a vehicle beyond the front line of a parking space would interfere with drive or aisle access, wheel blocks or other such devices shall be used to preclude such extension. 
(h)  Visibility: 
(1)  Access or driveways for parking areas and loading facilities shall be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving shall be clearly visible for a reasonable distance by any pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street or alley. 
(2)  No driveway shall be located so that it enters a public road within 100 feet of the intersection of any two or more public roads unless there are two driveways serving the lot, one of which is more than 100 feet and the other not less than 40 feet from said intersection. 
(3)  All driveways shall be located and the adjoining land graded so that vehicular traffic entering a public road has an unobstructed sight distance of no less than 300 feet. 
(i)  Marking: All parking areas for 12 or more spaces shall be marked with double paint lines located parallel to each other and 24 inches apart, which sets of lines shall be centered on the lines designating the side boundaries of each parking space. These lines shall run continuously from the frontmost to the rearmost limit of each space, facilitating movement into and out of the parking stalls by both vehicles and their occupants. 
(j)  Maintenance: Any owner of property used for parking areas or loading facilities shall maintain such areas in good condition without holes and free of dust, trash, and other debris. 
(k)  Signs: Where deemed necessary due to multiple curb cuts or possibly confusing circulation patterns, the entrances, exits, and intended circulation paths of a parking area shall be clearly marked. Where a heavy night use is projected, such markings shall be illuminated. 
(l)  Lighting: 
(1)  All off-street parking areas for other than one-family and two-family residences shall be adequately lighted. 
(2)  Lights used to illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 92-01) 
1149.06 - DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES. 
    In computing the minimum number of parking spaces required by this Zoning Ordinance to provide off-street parking for all employees, customers, visitors and invitees of a use, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining parking space requirements, floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of all the floors of a nonresidential building, measured from the faces of the exterior walls, excluding any stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts, and similar nonusable areas. 
(b)  Where seating capacity is the standard for determining parking space requirements, the capacity shall mean the number of seating units installed or indicated on each 18 lineal inches of benches, or pews, except where occupancy limits are set by the fire marshall, in which case such occupancy numbers shall apply. 
(c)  Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number. 
(d)  The parking space requirements for a use not specified in this Zoning Ordinance shall be determined following the procedure for determining "substantially similar uses" as required by Sections 1129.13-1129.17. 
1149.07 - PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS. 
    For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance the following minimum parking space requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Residential Uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwelling: Four for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  All other residential: Three for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Elderly housing parking: One space per dwelling unit, plus one space per regular shift employee. Elderly housing parking areas must be provided with aisles measuring no less than 21 feet in width regardless of the type of parking spaces used. 
(b)  Business Related Uses. 
(1)  Animal hospitals and kennels: One for each 400 square feet of floor area and one for each two employees. 
(2)  Motor vehicle repair station: One for each 400 square feet of floor area and one for each employee. 
(3)  Motor vehicle salesroom: One for each 400 square feet of floor area and one for each employee. 
(4)  Motor vehicle service station: Two for each service bay and one for every two gasoline pumps. 
(5)  Car washing facilities: One for each employee. 
(6)  Banks, financial institutions, post offices, and similar uses: One for every 250 square feet of floor area and one for each employee. 
(7)  Barber and beauty shops: Three for each barber or beauty operator station. 
(8)  Eat-in restaurants: Twenty-five spaces, or one for each three seats, plus one for each two employees, whichever is the larger. 
(9)  Carry-out restaurants: One for each 200 square feet of floor area and one for each two employees. 
(10)  Drive-in restaurants: One for each 125 square feet of floor area and one for each two employees. 
(11)  Hotels, motels, and lodges (without public meeting facilities): One for each sleeping room plus one space for each two employees, plus one space for each four seats in the dining room or restaurant area. 
(12)  Hotels, motels, and lodges (with public meeting facilities): One for each sleeping room plus one space for each two employees, plus one space for each four seats in the dining room or restaurant area, plus one space for each 75 square feet of floor area used for exhibition, meeting, or assembly purposes. 
(13)  Boarding, rooming, tourist or bed and breakfast home: One for each sleeping room. 
(14)  Furniture, appliance, hardware, machinery or equipment sales and service, and wholesale establishments: Two plus one additional space for each 200 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet. 
(15)  Consumer and trade service uses not otherwise specified, including quick-print shops: Two plus one for each employee. 
(16)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and similar type uses: One for each 25 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms, parlors and service rooms. 
(17)  Laundromats: One for each two washing machines. 
(18)  Office uses, administrative, business and professional: One for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(19)  Taverns, night clubs, sports clubs serving food and drink, and similar uses: One space for each three persons of capacity. 
(20)  Retail stores and all other types of business or commercial uses: Five spaces plus one for each 400 square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Recreational and Entertainment Uses. 
(1)  Bowling alleys: Four for each alley or lane, plus one for each three persons of capacity of areas used for restaurant, cocktail lounge, or similar use, plus one for each three employees. 
(2)  Dance halls, skating rinks: One for each 100 square feet of floor area used for the activity, plus one for each three person capacity in an associated restaurant, snack bar or cocktail lounge, plus one for each three employees. 
(3)  Swimming pools, public, community, or club: One for each ten persons of capacity, plus one for each three persons of capacity in an associated restaurant, snack bar, or cocktail lounge, plus one for each three employees. 
(4)  Auditoria, sports arenas, theaters, and similar uses: One for each four seats. 
(5)  Miniature golf courses: Two for each hole and one for each employee. 
(6)  Private clubs and lodges: One for each ten members. 
(7)  Tennis facilities, racquetball facilities, and similar uses: Two for each playing area, plus one for each employee, plus one for each 100 square feet of the activity area, plus one for each three persons of capacity in an associated restaurant, snack bar, or cocktail lounge. 
(d)  Institutional Uses. 
(1)  Churches and other places of religious assembly: One for each three seats in the main assembly room, one for each classroom, or one for each 45 square feet of assembly area, whichever is the greater. 
(2)  Hospitals: One and one-half for each bed, plus one for each two employees. 
(3)  Sanitaria, homes for the aged, nursing homes, rest homes, and similar uses: One for each two beds, plus one for each two employees. 
(4)  Medical and dental clinics: One for every 100 square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Libraries, museums, and art galleries: Ten plus one for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet, plus one for each two employees. 
(e)  Educational Institution (Public, Parochial, or Private) Uses. 
(1)  Elementary schools and kindergartens: Four for each classroom, plus one for every four seats in an auditorium or assembly hall, plus one for each non-teaching employee. 
(2)  High schools, middle schools, and colleges: One for every ten students and one for each teacher and employee, or one for every four seats in auditoria, assembly areas or sports fields, whichever is the greater. 
(3)  Business, technical and trade schools: One for each two students. 
(4)  Child care centers, nursery schools and similar uses: Four for each classroom. 
(f)  Manufacturing and Warehouse Uses. 
(1)  All types of manufacturing, storage, wholesale and warehouse uses: One for every employee on the largest shift for which the facility is designed, plus one for each motor vehicle used in the business. 
(2)  Cartage, express, parcel delivery, and freight terminals: One and one-half for each employee on the largest shift for which the facility is designed, plus one for each motor vehicle maintained on the premises. 
(g)  Additional Off-Street Auto Storage Areas for Drive-in Services. Establishments which by their nature create lines of customers waiting to be served within automobiles shall provide additional off-street auto storage areas, no less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long per area, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Photo pickups, restaurants, drive-thru beverage docks, and other similar commercial establishments that can normally serve customers in three minutes or less shall provide no less than five storage areas per window. Drive-in restaurants or other similar uses which require an additional stopping point for order pickup shall provide a minimum of three additional storage areas at each such stopping point. 
(2)  Other commercial establishments, such as banks, savings and loan offices, or similar facilities with service or money windows, shall provide no less than four storage areas per window. 
(3)  Self-serve automobile washing facilities shall provide no less than three storage areas per stall. All other auto washing facilities, and similarly operated oil change emporia, shall provide a minimum of six storage areas per entrance. 
(4)  Motor vehicle service stations shall provide no less than two storage areas at each accessible side of a gasoline pump island. Gasoline pumps shall be located no closer than 15 feet to a street right-of-way line. 
1149.08 - HANDICAPPED PARKING. 
    Parking facilities serving buildings and facilities required to be accessible to the physically handicapped shall have conveniently located designated spaces provided nearby as follows: 
Total Spaces in 
Lot/Structure Minimum Number 
of Designated Accessible 
Spaces Required Up to 100 One space for each 25 parking spaces. 101 to 200 4 spaces, plus one per 50 spaces over 100. 201 to 500 6 spaces, plus one per 75 spaces over 200. Over 500 10 spaces, plus one per 100 spaces over 500.  
1149.09 - LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES. 
(a)  All off-street parking facilities for all uses shall be located on the same lot as the uses they serve. 
(b)  Required parking spaces for apartments, attached single-family condominiums, dormitories or similar residential uses shall be located no more than 150 feet from the main entry door of the dwelling unit they serve. 
(c)  Parking of vehicles on lawn areas is prohibited for no more than 24 hours. Upon written application, a Zoning Certificate may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for parking on grass for special events. 
(Ord. No. 98-25, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1149.10 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, adopted December 19, 2017, deleted  1149.10, which pertained to Old Powell Commercial Downtown Business District. Regulations regarding Downtown Business Parking have been codified in  1143.16.2(h). 
1149.11 - OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS. 
    In every district and in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected or expanded in such a manner as to have a gross floor area of 3,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by any use requiring the pickup or delivery of merchandise or supplies, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same site with the building, and not located in any public street or alley, at least one off-street loading space and one additional off-street loading space for each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area so occupied in excess of 3,000 square feet. 
(a)  Loading Space Dimensions: Each loading space shall have minimum dimensions not less than 12 feet in width, 65 feet in length, and a vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. 
(b)  Location: Notwithstanding other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, required off-street loading spaces may be located in required side and rear yard areas, but shall not be located in front yards, provided that no more than 30 percent of such a required rear or side yard is so occupied, and no part of any loading space is located within 50 feet of the boundary of a residential district, closer than 70 feet to an existing residence, nor closer than 15 feet to any street or alley. 
(c)  Screening: In addition to the setback requirements specified above, screening shall be provided on each side of an off-street loading space except where the space abuts the building served and at the entry point to the space. Additional screening shall be provided to assure that there is no direct vision into such a loading area from a public street, from an abutting residential area, from an existing residence, or from other districts. Screening shall comply with the requirements of Section 1145.29. 
(d)  Access: All off-street loading spaces shall have access from a public street or alley in such a manner that any vehicle leaving the premises shall be traveling in a forward motion. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided with adequate maneuvering room and shall be designed to permit entry to such loading areas without interfering with traffic on adjacent streets or highways. 
(e)  Paving: All required off-street loading spaces, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas shall have an all-weather surface with an asphaltic or portland cement binder pavement in order to provide a durable and dust free surface. 
(f)  Drainage: All loading areas, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas shall be designed to prevent the excess drainage of surface water on to adjacent properties, walkways or onto the public streets. Arrangements shall be made to assure acceptable diversion to an adequate storm water channel or drainage system. 
(g)  Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate a loading area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining properties. 
CHAPTER 1151 - SIGNS[23] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate advertising, O.R.C.  715.65; Advertising on State and interstate highways, O.R.C. Ch. 5516 

1151.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for signs to safeguard life, health, property, safety, and public welfare, while encouraging creativity, variety and compatibility, and enhancement of the Municipality's image. The provisions of this chapter are intended to: 
(a)  Encourage creative and well-designed signs that contribute in a positive way to the Municipality's visual environment, express local character, and help develop a distinctive image for the Municipality; 
(b)  Encourage signs that are responsive to the aesthetics and character of their particular location, adjacent buildings and uses, and the surrounding neighborhood. Signs should be compatible and integrated with the building's architectural design and with other signs on the property; 
(c)  Prevent signs from becoming a distraction or obstruction to the safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(d)  Encourage a healthful economic and business environment in the community; 
(e)  Limit the height and size of signs to those that are appropriate in scale to the community; 
(f)  Provide adequate way finding signage for motorists and pedestrians, and 
(g)  Reduce visual clutter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.02 - APPLICABILITY. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all signs placed, erected, installed, painted, modified or altered in the Municipality of Powell shall conform to the standards set forth in this chapter and shall require Zoning Certificates in accordance with Section 1151.09 of this chapter. Erection, modification, alteration, placement, replacement or other action involving a sign that is in any way inconsistent with this chapter shall be a violation of the Zoning Code and subject to penalties and remedies set forth in Chapter 1135 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(b)  Sign Standards. The sign standards provided in this Chapter are intended to apply to signs in each zoning district in the Municipality. Only signs authorized by this Chapter shall be allowed. 
(c)  Existing Signs; Continuance. Except as otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this Chapter shall require removal or discontinuance of an existing on-premises or existing off-premises sign. No existing signs shall be enlarged or extended without a Zoning Certificate. Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged or extended and these signs shall be deemed a nonconforming sign under the terms of the Zoning Code. 
(d)  Nonconforming Signs. 
(1)  Any legal nonconforming sign, as defined in Section 1151.02, may be continued in use if maintained in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  All pre-existing illegal nonconforming signs must be removed in accordance with this sub-section. The Zoning Inspector shall issue an order for the sign to be removed within 20 days. The cost of removal will be assessed to the property owner. If the property owner refuses to pay for removal of the sign, the cost of such removal shall be assessed to, and a lien placed upon, the property owner's tax records. 
(3)  Any illegal nonconforming sign displayed on the premises shall be removed or brought into conformance with the provision of this Chapter before a Zoning Certificate for a new sign may be issued. 
(4)  A legal nonconforming sign is allowed to remain. However, a legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation and shall be immediately brought into compliance with this chapter (with the approval of a Zoning Certificate) or shall be removed when any of the following occurs: 
A.  The nonconforming sign is structurally altered, enlarged, relocated, or replaced. 
B.  The nonconforming sign is determined by the Zoning Inspector or the Chief Building Official to be in a dangerous or defective condition; to fail to conform to health and fire codes; a public nuisance; or abandoned, deteriorated; or in need of repair or replacement. 
C.  The nonconforming sign face and/or supportive structure is destroyed or damaged in excess of 50 percent of the combined replacement value of the sign and supportive structure, by any cause. 
D.  Upon the discontinuance of the present use of property for which the sign was intended for a period of more than six months. 
(5)  A nonconforming sign shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless such sign is made to conform to this chapter. If an owner is forced to move a nonconforming sign by Municipal, state, or federal officials for any reason other than enforcement, such sign shall maintain its nonconforming status, but must still adhere to the setback requirements. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the ordinary repair, maintenance, and non-structural alteration of nonconforming signs. Maintaining the nonconforming sign to the exact legal nonconforming design shall be allowed; however, any proposed changes to a nonconforming sign, except for re-facing an existing sign, shall require that the sign be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter. Re-facing an existing nonconforming sign shall not be considered an alteration as long as the re-facing constitutes an exact replica of the existing sign face. The design, color scheme, translucency, graphics and text must exactly match those existing. No structural alterations shall be made in, to, or upon such nonconforming sign, except those required by law to make the sign conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(7)  Nonconforming signs are also subject to the provisions of Chapter 1125 in addition to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following are definitions of specialized terms and phrases used in this chapter and not previously defined in Chapter 1123. The definitions are organized in alphabetical order. 
    Abandoned sign means any sign that advertises a business, leaser, owner, product, service or activity that is no longer located on the premises where the sign is displayed. 
    Alteration means any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign. 
    Animated or moving sign means a sign that uses movement, lighting, or special materials to depict action or create a special effect to imitate movement. 
    Awnings and canopies means roof-like covers that project from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements. 
    Awning sign means any sign copy or logo attached to or painted on an awning. 

    Banner or pennant means any non-rigid cloth, canvas, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material that is mounted to any structure, staff, pole, line, or framing. Such signs are typically related to a public demonstration or for the promotion of civic, welfare or charitable enterprises. National, State or municipal flags shall not be considered a banner or pennant. 
    Blade sign means a small, pedestrian-oriented sign mounted so that the sign face is perpendicular to the face of the building. A blade sign may be hung beneath a canopy or awning. 

    Building frontage, primary means that portion of the building frontage that faces the street. In cases where a building has more than one street frontage, the longest of the street frontages shall be considered the primary building frontage. In cases where a business has no building frontage facing a street, the building frontage with the primary business entrance shall be considered the primary building frontage. A single multi-tenant building has one primary frontage, the allowable sign area for which may be distributed at the discretion of the owner; however, in no event shall the combined sign area for all tenants exceed the allowable sign area for the building. 

    Changeable copy sign means a sign which displays words, lines, logos, or symbols that can change to provide different information. Changeable copy signs include computer signs, reader boards with changeable letters, and time and temperature signs. 

    Channel letters means three-dimensional individually cut letters or figures whether or not illuminated, affixed to a structure. 

    Copy means words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two identical and opposite parallel planes. 
    Edge of roof means on a pitched roof, the lowest portion of the fascia board covering the roof rafters, or if no fascia board exists, the lowest point of the roof rafters. On a flat roof, the top of the parapet wall or three feet above the roof deck, whichever is less. 
    Electronic reader board sign or electronic graphics sign means a sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. 

    Electronic Sign means any sign that is externally powered to omit light and bring attention to the sign. This sign can utilize any form of technology to function, not including neon. This type of sign would be placed internal to a structure and would be viewable from the street, usually within a window. 
    External illumination means the lighting of an object from a light source located a distance from the object. 
    Flashing sign means a sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
    Freestanding sign means any sign not affixed to a building. Freestanding signs may be permanent or temporary. 
    Inflatable device means an object that is blown up with air or gas. 
    Internally illuminated sign means a sign whose light source is located in the interior of the sign so that the rays go through the face of the sign, or light source which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign. 
    Joint identification sign means a sign which serves as a common or collective identification for two or more uses located within the same building, or which share a common wall, or for two or more buildings located within a jointly used area, provided the buildings are in close proximity to one another. 

    Monument sign means a permanent, freestanding sign where the entire bottom of the sign is affixed to the ground, not to a building. 

    Multiple user building means a development consisting of four or more separate uses or tenancies that share either the same parcel or structure and use common access and parking facilities. 
    Neon sign means a glass tube lighting in which a gas and phosphors are used in combination to create a colored light. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this Chapter, constructed in conformance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but by reason of its size, height, location, design, or construction is no longer in conformance with the regulations of this Chapter. 
    Nonresidential district means any of the following zoning districts: Planned Commercial District (PC), Planned Industrial District (PI), Planned Office District (PO), and the Downtown Business District (DB). 
    Off-premise sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the lot or premises on which the sign is located. 
    On-premise sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on the lot or premises on which the sign is located. 
    Permanent sign means a sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located on the premises. 
    Pole sign means a sign mounted on a free-standing pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is ten feet or more above finished grade. 
    Portable sign means a sign that is not affixed to a structure or the ground (e.g., A-frame or sandwich board sign). 

    Projecting sign means a sign that protrudes in a V-shape from the top of the ground floor over the sidewalk, like a traditional theater marquee. 
    Residential district means any of the following zoning districts: Residence District (R), Planned Residence District (PR), and Downtown Residence District (DR). 
    Roof sign means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the highest point of building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 

    Sign means an object, device display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to identify, display, or direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected image. Unless otherwise noted, the term "sign" includes both on-premises and off-premises signs. 
    Sign area means the entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles which enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation, together with any frame or structural trim forming an integral part of the display used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed. 
    Sign height means the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the sign to the finished grade immediately below the base of the sign, including all base and/or other mounting material. 
    Sign-sidewalk sign means a sign with two faces that are adjoined at the top and displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured, or similar design. These are also known as "A-Frame" signs, and are intended to be seen by a pedestrian on a sidewalk rather than by a driver or passenger in a vehicle. Sidewalk Sign may also mean a sign with two faces that are adjoined at some point along the sign frame and the support legs are parallel to the sign (This looks like the letter "T", hence these are also known as "T-Frame" signs). 
    Stick sign means any type of temporary signs that are placed in the ground and consist of a paper or non-paper corrugated or similar temporary material placed over thin metal or wooden supports. 
    Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from any public right-of-way, parking area or neighboring property. 
    Three-dimensional signs means signs that have a depth or relief on their surface greater than six inches. 
    Vehicle sign means a sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property. 
    Wall sign means a sign that is attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to the building wall. 

    Window area means the area shall be computed by calculating each window pane or panel. The area shall be separate for each building face, and for each window. A group of window panes or panels may be considered one window if they are adjoining on the building face and are less than six inches apart. 
    Window sign means a sign (temporary or permanent), poster, symbol, numerals, or letters, posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view that is located within three feet of the window is considered a window sign for the purpose of calculating the total area of all window signs. 
Electronic Sign Related Definitions 
    Candelas, cd: SI (System International) unit of luminous measurement when utilized per unit m2. Can also be utilized per unit area of ft2. 
    Center Beam Candlepower (CBCP): Center beam candlepower is the luminous intensity at the center of a beam, expressed in candelas (cd). 
    Direct lighting: Lighting by luminaires distributing 90 to 100 percent of the emitted light in the general direction of the surface to be illuminated. The term usually refers to light emitted in a downward direction. 
    Directional lighting: Illumination on the work-plane or on an object predominantly from a single direction, especially when direct lighting is incorporated into electronic signs. LED's are an example of directional lighting. 
    Foot-candle, fc: A unit of illuminance equal to 1 lumen per square foot. One foot-candle equals 10.76 lux. 
    General lighting: Lighting designed to provide a substantially uniform illuminance throughout an area, exclusive of any provision for special local requirements. This a "spherical" distribution of light. 
    Illuminance: Light arriving at a surface, expressed in lumens per unit area; 1 lumen per square foot equals 1 foot-candle, while 1 lumen per square meter equals 1 lux. 
    Luminance, L: light reflected in a particular direction; the photometric quantity most closely associated with brightness perception, measured in units of luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area (square feet or square meters). 
    Lumen, lm: a unit of luminous flux; the overall light output of a luminous source is measured in lumens. A unit measurement of the rate at which a lamp produces light. A lamp's light output rating expresses the total amount of light emitted in all directions per unit time. 
    Lux, lx: a unit of illuminance equal to 1 lumen per square meter. One lux equals 0.093 foot-candle. 
    NIT: Non-SI unit of luminous measurement per unit m2. Common application within the sign industry. One NIT is equivalent to one cd/m2. 
    Watt, W: a unit of electrical power (energy) equal to 1 joule per second. Volts times amps. 
    Work plane: the plane at which work usually is done, and on which the illuminance is specified and measured. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1151.04 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS AND DISTRICTS. 
(a)  Signs in Public Rights-of-Way. Except as provided, no sign shall be placed or deposited within any public right-of-way or on any tree, pole, post, meter, or similar object located within the public right-of-way. Under no circumstance may any signs that are permitted in the right-of-way interfere with vehicular or pedestrian visibility. Signs interfering with visibility will be removed. 
(1)  The following signs may be installed in the public rights-of-way without a Zoning Certificate: 
A.  Signs conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
B.  Signs installed by employees or officials of a municipal, state or federal agency in the course of their governmental duties; 
C.  Signs required by a state or federal statute; 
D.  Signs required by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
E.  Public directional and safety signs. 
(2)  Blade signs attached to a building may project a maximum of 40 inches over a public right-of-way provided the lowest part of the sign is at least eight feet but no more than 15 feet above the pedestrian thoroughfare and provided said sign has received a Zoning Certificate from the Zoning Administrator. Blade signs shall not project over any curb line or street. 
(b)  Colors. Not more than five colors may be used per sign. For purposes of this Section, black or white shall be considered a color. Neon and fluorescent colors are prohibited. 
(c)  Lettering Styles and Sign Coverage. No more than two letter styles or more than three sizes of letters are permitted per sign. Letters may not occupy more than 75 percent of any sign panel. 
(d)  Measurement of Sign Area. 
(1)  The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all lettering, background, emblem, logo, representation, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight lines drawn at right angles. 
(2)  Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area. 
(3)  Double-faced (back-to-back) signs shall be regarded as a single sign only if mounted on a single structure, and the distance between each sign face does not exceed two feet at any point. Only one face of an identical double-faced sign shall be measured when determining maximum allowable area. 
(4)  Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. 
(5)  Regardless of their spacing, the letters forming a word or name shall be considered a single sign. The area of such a sign shall be measured as provided in this chapter. 
(e)  Measurement of Sign Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at a computed grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign (including the sign face, sign structure, or any other appurtenance). The computed grade shall be the elevation of the nearest point to the proposed sign location of the crown of the nearest public street providing access; or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is higher. 

(f)  Alterations. No sign shall hereafter be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The repainting of signs shall not be deemed to be an alteration within the meaning of this chapter. 
(g)  Sign Maintenance. Signs and supporting hardware shall be structurally safe, clean, free of visible defects, and functioning properly at all times. Visible rot or rust, exposed lighting sources or wires, falling parts, or broken and missing parts are prima fascia evidence that a sign is in a state of disrepair. Repairs to signs shall be equal to or better in quality of materials and design than the original sign. 
(h)  Notice to Repair. When the Zoning Administrator determines that such a sign exists in a state of disrepair, the Zoning Administrator shall issue to the owner of the sign and the owner of the real estate a notice of such disrepair and the need for corrective action. Any party receiving such notice may appeal the notice to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 1127.03. If such an appeal is not filed within 20 days of the date on which the notice is sent, persons receiving the notice shall be responsible for repairing the sign or otherwise bringing it into conformance with this chapter. The repair work shall be accomplished within 30 days of the date of the notice, unless the person undertaking the work files a request with the Zoning Administrator for an extension. If such request shows diligence and good faith such as ordering materials or signing a contract with a licensed contractor, the Zoning Administrator shall grant an extension of a maximum of 30 days for completion of the work. If an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 1127.03 the time for performance shall be delayed until resolution of the appeal. If the Zoning Administrator finds that the lack of repair constitutes a danger to persons or to property other than that of those persons receiving the notice, the Zoning Administrator shall so state in the notice and the Municipality may seek immediate relief under the Building Code or under the laws of public nuisance. 
(i)  Sign Removal or Replacement. When a sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that supported the sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure. 
(j)  Sign Attachment and Support. No sign shall be attached to or supported by a fence, tree, utility pole, light pole, trash receptacle, bench, vending machine, gasoline pump, or public shelter, nor shall such sign be painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(k)  Changeable Copy Signs. Manual or electronic changeable copy signs shall not be permitted on any sign within the municipality unless it is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of a comprehensive sign plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.05 - PERMANENT SIGNS. 
(a)  Residential Districts. Permanent signs in residential districts shall conform to the following standards as well as the other applicable standards of the Codified Ordinances: 
(1)  Number. No more than one such sign may be located on a lot. 
(2)  Type. Unless otherwise stated, wall signs are the only types of signs permitted. Permanent subdivision identification signs within entrance features are permitted and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  [Off-premises signs.] All off-premises signs are prohibited. 
(4)  Maximum area and height. Signs may not exceed four square feet in area or be more than two feet in height. 
(5)  Illumination. Signs shall not be separately illuminated. This standard is not intended to prohibit the installation of such a sign near a porch light or yard light, which may incidentally illuminate the sign. Permanent subdivision identification signs within entrance features may be lighted by an external source, but such illumination shall be in a manner which avoids glare or reflection which in any way interferes with traffic safety 
(b)  Non-Residential Districts. Permanent signs in non-residential districts shall conform to the following standards and all other applicable standards of the Codified Ordinances: 
(1)  Number. 
A.  Wall signs. No more than one wall sign shall be permitted. A secondary wall sign no more than 75 percent of the size of the primary wall sign shall be permitted if the property fronts two or more public streets. No more than one secondary wall sign shall be permitted. Blade and awning and canopy signs shall be considered wall signs. 
B.  Freestanding signs. No more than one sign shall be permitted per lot frontage. 
C.  Joint identification signs. No more than one sign shall be permitted. A secondary joint identification sign shall be permitted if the property fronts two or more public streets and is located on a lot more than two acres. No more than one secondary joint identification sign shall be permitted per development. 
(2)  Maximum area and height. 
A.  Wall signs. The total area shall not exceed one square foot per one lineal foot of the length of the wall on which the sign is to be attached up to a maximum of 36 square feet. Within the Historic District, the maximum size shall be 18 square feet. The maximum height permitted shall be 15 feet in any district. 
B.  Freestanding signs. The total area shall not exceed 48 square feet. Within the Historic District, the maximum size shall be 12 square feet. The maximum height shall be eight feet in any district. 
C.  Joint identification signs. On lots less than ten acres, primary joint identification signs may not exceed 56 square feet in area or be more than eight feet in height. Secondary joint identification signs shall not exceed 36 square feet in area or be more than eight feet in height. On lots ten acres or greater primary joint identification signs may not exceed 72 square feet in area or be more than ten feet in height and secondary joint identification signs may not exceed 48 square feet or be more than eight feet in height. Within the Historic District, the maximum size shall be reduced by one-half the size stated above. 
(3)  Illumination. 
A.  Unless otherwise stated, signs may be illuminated from within or from an external source, but such illumination shall be in a manner which avoids glare or reflection which in any way interferes with traffic safety. Within the Historic District, illumination shall only be from an external source. 
B.  Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background and translucent copy. 
C.  External lighting fixtures shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign. 
D.  Fixtures can be mounted on the top of the sign or be ground mounted with up-lighting not exceeding 100 lamp watts per sign face. 
E.  The maximum watts permitted to illuminate a sign shall be two watts per sign face square foot provided at no point on the face of the sign and at no time shall the illumination exceed 30 vertical foot-candles during hours of darkness. 
F.  Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing, blinking, or oscillating light sources, lasers, beacons, search lights, or strobe lighting are prohibited. 
G.  Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices. 
H.  Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible. 
I.  Neon lighted signs, or signs resembling neon lighted signs, are prohibited if they can be seen and readable from the outside. 
(c)  Zoning Certificate Required. Unless otherwise stated, all permanent signs in residential and nonresidential districts require a Zoning Certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.06 - TEMPORARY SIGNS. 
(a)  All Districts. 
(1)  Non-Commercial Speech Temporary Signs: Temporary signs that portray a message which is not commercial in nature (that do not advertise a business, commodity, product or service) shall be allowed. No more than one sign per statement is permissible per lot per frontage. Any non-commercial sign may remain on a lot indefinitely, until such a time that the sign has not been maintained in an original or near-original condition. 
(b)  Residential Districts. Temporary signs in residential districts shall conform to the following standards as well as the other applicable standards of the Codified Ordinances: 
(1)  Number. No more than one sign per statement is permissible per lot per frontage. 
(2)  Maximum area and height. Signs may not exceed six square feet in area or be more than four feet in height. 
(3)  Display period. Each temporary sign may not be displayed for more than 45 consecutive days, unless said sign is maintained in good condition as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(4)  Off-premises signs. Off-premises temporary signs are prohibited. 
(5)  Illumination. Signs shall not be separately illuminated. This standard is not intended to prohibit the installation of such a sign near a porch light or yard light, which may incidentally illuminate the sign. 
(6)  Zoning Certificate requirements. Temporary signs in residential districts do not require a Zoning Certificate. 
(c)  Except as authorized above for non-commercial speech temporary signs, no other temporary or portable signs shall be allowed in the City. 
(d)  Temporary New Development Construction Signs. 
(1)  The owner or developer of a residential subdivision or a non-residential development may erect one sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area during the course of development. Once 80 percent of the development is complete as determined by the Zoning Administrator, these signs shall be removed by the Zoning Certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.07 - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES. 
(a)  Awning and Canopy Signs. Awning and canopy signs may be permitted only as an integral part of the awning or canopy to which they are attached or applied and shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Location. Signs may be placed only on awnings that are located on first- and second-story building frontages, including those fronting a parking lot or pedestrian way. 
(2)  Extension. Such signs shall not extend more than three feet from the face of the building to which they are attached. 
(3)  Minimum clearance. A minimum clearance of ten feet shall be maintained above sidewalks. 
(4)  Copy. The copy on an awning sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the sign's total area. 
(5)  Illumination. Internal illumination of the awning is prohibited. 
(b)  Blade signs. 
(1)  Location. Blade signs shall be placed only on a ground floor facade, except for businesses located above the ground level with direct exterior pedestrian access. 
(2)  Height above finished grade. The lowest point of a blade signs shall be at least eight feet but no more than 15 feet above finished grade. Blade signs shall not extend beyond the roof line in a vertical direction. 
(3)  Sign structure. Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design and scale of the sign. Brackets and/or hardware for the sign may not extend more than four inches from the outside face of the sign. 
(4)  Square footage. A maximum of eight square feet will be allowed. 
(5)  Illumination. Internal illumination is prohibited. 
(c)  Freestanding Signs. 
(1)  Posts. Signs mounted on single poles or posts shall be prohibited outside the Historic District Freestanding signs shall be designed utilizing two posts, one on either side of the sign, or be designed with a monument type base. No more than two posts may be used. The height of the posts will not be included in the maximum height permitted for the sign, however posts shall not protrude higher than one foot above the height of the sign. Minimum post size (this refers to the finished outside dimension) shall be a six inch by six inch shall be required. 
(2)  Base material of monument signs. The base of monument signs shall be brick, stone, stucco, or other more permanent material not subject to water damage. The exposed base of a monument sign shall not exceed two feet in height. The height of the base will be included when calculating the height of the sign. 
(3)  Cantilever signs. The post used to anchor cantilever signs shall be wood or another natural material such as brick or stone. 
(4)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure equal to twice the area of one face of the sign. Landscaping is not required on temporary, freestanding signs. 
(5)  Location. The sign must be located along frontage adjoining a public street. 
(6)  Setbacks. The front setback for freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 15 from the public right-of-way line unless otherwise stated. The sign must also meet the side yard setback for the applicable zoning district unless otherwise stated. 
(d)  Joint Identification Signs. 
(1)  Type. Primary and secondary freestanding joint identification signs must be monument signs. 
(2)  Setbacks. The front setback for freestanding joint identification signs shall be 25 feet from the public right-of-way. The sign must also meet the side yard setback for the applicable zoning district unless otherwise stated. 
(e)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Location. All wall signs shall be mounted on the building which houses the establishment advertised by such signs, except as otherwise specifically authorized by this Zoning Code. Such signs shall be located on or along a wall of such a building which faces a street, parking lot, or service drive, and shall not project above the roof line or the cap of parapets of such building, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Projection from wall. All wall signs shall be parallel to the wall on which they are installed. The sign shall not project from the surface upon which it is attached more than 12 inches in a non-residential district. In a residential district, a wall sign shall not project more than three inches. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.08 - PROHIBITED SIGNS. 
(a)  Prohibited Signs. The following signs and types of signs are inconsistent with the purposes and standards of this chapter and are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Signs within any public right-of-way unless specifically authorized under Section 1151.04(a). 
(2)  Flashing, moving, rotating, intermittently lighted signs or other mechanical devices which creates the appearance of movement. 
(3)  Air actuated attraction devices. 
(4)  Roof signs. 
(5)  Pole signs. 
(6)  Portable changeable copy signs. 
(7)  Electronic variable message signs, reader boards, and changeable copy signs except as authorized under 1151.04(a)(1) or 1151.04(k). 
(8)  Stick Signs or any type of portable or temporary sign portraying a commercial message. 
(b)  Prohibited Sign Attachments. No temporary or permanent items shall be attached to any sign within the Municipality of Powell. This shall include, but not be limited to, balloons, streamers, arrows, or other such items that are not a part of the originally approved Zoning Certificate for such sign. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.09 - SIGN ZONING CERTIFICATES. 
(a)  Zoning Certificates Required. To ensure compliance with the regulations of this chapter, a Zoning Certificate shall be required in order to apply, erect, move, alter, reconstruct, or repair any permanent or temporary sign, except signs that are do not require zoning certificates consistent with the requirements of Sections 1151.04(a)(1) and 1151.10. A Zoning Certificate is also required for the lighting of new or the relighting of existing signs. Granting of a Zoning Certificate from the Zoning Administrator does not constitute a building permit. 
(b)  Review Authority. The Zoning Administrator will review all Zoning Certificate applications within the Municipality of Powell. The Zoning Administrator has 30 days from the date of submittal to review all Zoning Certificate applications and either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the Zoning Certificate application. If the Zoning Administrator grants a Zoning Certificate with conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall state the conditions in writing, with citations to relevant sections of this chapter. The applicant shall sign a statement acknowledging the conditions set forth by the Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator denies a Zoning Certificate application, the Zoning Administrator shall do so in writing and state in writing the reason for denial, with citations to relevant sections of this chapter or other provisions of the Codified Ordinances. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator as outlined in Section 1151.15. 
(c)  Preparation. Applicants for a sign Zoning Certificate must submit the following information. Incomplete applications will be denied. 
(1)  Color sign rendering. 
(2)  Site plan and elevation drawings. 
(3)  Sign dimensions and dimensions of sign mounting material, where applicable. 
(4)  Building faade dimensions, where applicable. 
(5)  Distance of sign from all public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Style, type, wattage, and location of all lighting. 
(7)  Landscaping plan for freestanding signs. 
(8)  List of construction materials, including sign mounting material, where applicable. 
(d)  Criteria for Approval. The Zoning Inspector shall approve a Zoning Certificate if the proposed sign conforms to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.10 - SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS. 
(a)  Signs Exempt from Regulations. Any sign located entirely inside a building and not visible from the public right-of-way or from private property other than the property on which such sign is located shall be entirely exempt from regulation under this chapter. 
(b)  Permanent Signs Allowed in Any District without a Zoning Certificate and Not Included in Dimensional Limitations. Zoning Certificates shall not be required for the signs listed herein. These signs shall not be included in the determination of the total allowable number of signs or total allowable sign area for a site. 
(1)  Signs conforming to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
(2)  Signs installed by employees or officials of a state or federal agency or of the Municipality or Delaware County in the course of their governmental duties; 
(3)  Signs required by a state or federal statute or agency; 
(4)  Signs required by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(5)  Signs installed by public utilities to demarcate their rights-of-way. 
(6)  Signs installed by a transit company; 
(7)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area; 
(8)  On-site traffic and other directional signs indicating points of entry or exit to off-street parking, identifying specific parking areas and directions to buildings and other services, provided that such signs are not larger than two square feet in area and bear no commercial message. Such signs shall not obstruct the view of motorists for the purposes of ingress and egress. 
(c)  Temporary Signs Allowed without a Zoning Certificate. 
(1)  Official and legal notices required by a court or governmental agency. 
(2)  Temporary signs in residential areas. 
(d)  Window Signs. Window signs are permitted in any zoning district and do not require a Zoning Certificate. However, all window signs shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Number. No more than 20 percent of the windows in any structure may be covered with permanent or temporary window signs. 
(2)  Surface coverage. Window signs may not be larger than 20 percent of the aggregate window area. 
(3)  Neon Signs. Neon, or neon simulating, signs are prohibited. 
(4)  Electronic Signs. All other electronic signs shall not exceed one foot by two foot area (two square feet) within any given window. Only one electronic sign per business per frontage is permitted. These signs shall not exceed 15 characters, including spaces and other special characters. 
A.  General Lighting Standards. 
1.  Light bulb illumination is measured in lumens. There is no conversion between lumens and nits, mainly because light bulbs are spherical (general) sources of light. 
2.  In no case shall the lighting intensity of any sign exceed the limit of 75 foot candles measured with a standard light meter or equivalent perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign, whether it is height or width. 
3.  In no case shall any exposed reflective-type bulbs, incandescent lamp, or any other type of bare bulb illumination exceed 20 watts. 
B.  Directional Lighting Standards. 
1.  Directional type signs are measured in nits (candles per square meter). 
2.  The average number of "on" pixels in a message is 40 percent for the average measurement and 100 percent of the "on" pixels is for the maximum measurement. Most programming is assumed to be near the 40 percent number. 
3.  For daytime programming, the average illumination is limited to 2,000 nits. 
4.  For nighttime programming, the average illumination is limited to 500 nits. 
5.  The maximum daytime illumination is 5,000 nits. 
6.  The nighttime illumination is to be set to 25 percent of the daytime illumination but can be adjusted up or down, in one percent increments, with photocell software for incremental dimming. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.11 - COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN. 
(a)  Purpose. A Comprehensive Sign Plan is intended to integrate the design of the signs proposed for a new development project, or an existing commercial property, with the design of the structures, into a unified architectural statement. A Comprehensive Sign Plan provides a means for defining common sign regulations for multi-user projects, to encourage maximum incentive and latitude in the design and display of multiple signs and to achieve, not circumvent, the intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Applicability. The approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan shall be required when two or more signs requiring Zoning Certificates are proposed for a new development or existing site, or if a joint identification sign is proposed. 
(c)  Approval Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission, or in the case of a property within the Historic District, the Historic Downtown Advisory Committee, must approve a Comprehensive Sign Plan prior to issuance of a Sign Zoning Certificate by the Zoning Administrator, under the requirements of this chapter, and the design guidelines within the Historic District. 
(d)  Application Requirements. An application for a Comprehensive Sign Plan shall include all information and materials required in Section 1151.09 and the filing fee set by City Council. 
(e)  Standards. A Comprehensive Sign Plan shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The plan shall comply with the purpose of this chapter and the overall intent of this section; 
(2)  The signs shall enhance the overall development, be in harmony with, and relate visually to other signs included in the comprehensive sign plan, to the structures and/or developments they identify, and to surrounding development; 
(3)  The Comprehensive Sign Plan shall accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in use or tenants; and 
(4)  The Comprehensive Sign Plan shall comply with the standards of this chapter. 
(f)  Revisions to Comprehensive Sign Plans. The Zoning Administrator may approve the substitution of signs provided these signs meet the all the requirements of Chapter 1151 and the adopted Comprehensive Sign Plan. If additional signage is proposed or if proposed signs are changed in any aspect to the intent of the original Comprehensive Sign Plan, approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission or Historic Downtown Advisory Committee is required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.12 - ABANDONED SIGNS. 
(a)  Abandonment Defined. If any sign shall become abandoned, in a manner defined herein, such sign is declared a public nuisance by reason that continued lack of use results in lack of reasonable and adequate maintenance, thereby causing deterioration and creating a blighting influence on nearby properties. An abandoned sign shall be any sign that meets any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any sign associated with the abandoned nonconforming use. 
(2)  Any sign that remains after the termination of a business. A business shall be considered terminated if it has ceased operations for at least 60 consecutive days. 
(3)  Any sign that is not maintained in accordance with Section 1151.04(g). 
(b)  Determination of Abandonment. When the Zoning Administrator finds, upon investigation, that a sign has been abandoned, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of said sign and the owner of the property upon which such sign is located, of any findings. Such notice shall advise the owner of the sign and the owner of the property that said sign has been declared abandoned and must be removed within 30 days from the date of mailing of said notice. The owner of the sign or the owner of the property may appeal such decision as provided in Section 1151.15. 
(c)  Right to Remove. If the sign is not removed as ordered, the sign may be removed by the Municipality of Powell at the expense of the lessee or owner. If the Municipality is not reimbursed for the cost of removal within 30 days of such removal, the amount thereof shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection as a special assessment or lien against the property upon which such sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.13 - SUBSTITUTION OF MESSAGES. 
    Any sign allowed herein may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity, or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so long as said sign complies with the size, height, area, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.14 - SEVERABILITY. 
(a)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter. It is intended that if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is severed, the remaining parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, phrases, clauses, terms or words shall be considered independent, valid, and enforceable. 
(b)  Severability Where less Speech Results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth in Section 1151.14(a), or elsewhere in this chapter, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to zoning certificates or otherwise. It is intended that if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is severed, the remaining parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, phrases, clauses, terms or words shall be considered independent, valid, and enforceable. 
(c)  Severability of Provisions Pertaining to Prohibited Signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth in Section 1151.14(a) and (b), or elsewhere in this chapter, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this article or any other laws declared unconstitutional by valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign types prohibited and not allowed under Section 1151.08 of this chapter. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of Chapter 1151 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of Chapter 1151. It is intended that if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is severed, the remaining parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, phrases, clauses, terms or words shall be considered independent, valid, and enforceable. 
(d)  Severability of Prohibition on Signs Bearing Off-premise Commercial Messages. If any part section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter and/or any other provisions of the Zoning Code or the Codified Ordinances are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on signs bearing off-premises commercial messages as contained herein. It is intended that if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is severed, the remaining parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, phrases, clauses, terms or words shall be considered independent, valid, and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.15 - APPEALS. 
    The decision of the Zoning Administrator regarding issuance of a Zoning Certificate, notice to repair, or determination of abandonment may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals subject to the requirements in Chapter 1127. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
1151.99 - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any requirement or prohibition of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this Code, and shall be subject to enforcement under the requirements of Chapter 1135, including the penalties and other remedies allowed by that chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-29, 8-18-2015) 
CHAPTER 1153 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
Sections: 

1153.01 - LEGISLATIVE PURPOSES. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the Municipality. Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are: 
(a)  To direct the location of towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in the Municipality. 
(b)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(c)  To minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities through careful design, siting, and landscaping techniques. 
(d)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
(e)  To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties caused by towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed. 
(f)  To the greatest extent feasible, ensure that towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(g)  To the greatest extent feasible, ensure that proposed towers and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are designed in harmony with natural settings and in a manner consistent with current development patterns. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.02 - APPLICABILITY. 
(a)  All towers, antenna support structures and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, any portion of which are located within the Municipality, are subject to this chapter. 
(b)  Except as provided in this chapter, any use being made of an existing tower or antenna support structure on the effective date of this chapter (herein "Nonconforming Structures") shall be allowed to continue, even if in conflict with the terms of this chapter. Any tower site that has received Municipal approval in the form of either a special exception or building permit, but has not yet been constructed or located, shall be considered a Nonconforming Structure so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Antenna support structure means any building or other structure other than a tower which can be used for location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
    Applicant means any person that applies for a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section 1153.07. 
    Application means the process by which an applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a Conditional Use Permit under the provisions of this chapter. An application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the Municipality concerning such a request. 
    Municipality means the Municipality of Powell, a municipal corporation, in the State of Ohio, acting by and through its Council. 
    Code means the Codified Ordinances of the City. 
    Co-location means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications provider. 
    Council means the Powell Municipal Council. 
    Emergency means a reasonably unforeseen occurrence with a potential to endanger personal safety or health, or cause substantial damage to property, that calls for immediate action. 
    Engineer means any engineer licensed by the State of Ohio. 
    Equipment shelter means the structure in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility is housed. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
    Monopole means a support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation. 
    Open space means land devoted to conservation or recreational purposes and/or land designated by a municipality to remain undeveloped (may be specified on a zoning map). 
    Person is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not-for profit. 
    Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC. 
    Viewshed means the area surrounding a Wireless Telecommunications Facility or Antenna Support Structure, within which the Facility or Structure is visible from street level. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications as authorized by the FCC which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon a tower or antenna support structure. However, the term Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which are located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category, subject to the requirements of Section 1153.06(a)(5). 
(3)  Antennas used by amateur radio operators are excluded from this definition. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.04 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are either permitted uses or conditional uses in a variety of zoning districts contingent upon a number of requirements being met. These criteria are in place in an attempt to minimize adverse health, safety, public welfare or visual impacts through buffering, siting, design and construction, and reduction of the need for new towers. 
(b)  The following requirements apply to all Wireless Telecommunications Facilities regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located. These general standards are to be supplemented with the specific regulations for nonresidential and residential districts as set forth in Sections 1153.05 and 1153.06 herein. 
(1)  When the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility or antenna support structure is to include a new tower, a plot plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted. This plot plan shall indicate all building uses within 200 feet of the proposed facility. Aerial photos and/or renderings may augment the plot plan. 
(2)  A diagram or map showing the viewshed of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or antenna support structure shall be provided. 
(3)  Photosimulations of the proposed facility from effected residential properties and public rights-of-way at varying distances shall be provided. 
(4)  The location of the tower and equipment shelter and antenna support structure shall comply with all natural resource protection standards established in the Zoning Code, including those for floodplain, wetlands and steep slopes. 
(5)  Security fencing eight feet in height may be required to surround the tower, equipment shelter and any guy wires, either completely or individually as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. No barbed or razor wire shall be permitted. The City and co-locators shall have reasonable access. No fence shall be required on top of a building or other structure if access to the roof or top of the structure or building is secure. 
(6)  Buffer plantings shall be located around the perimeter of the security fence as deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Options are an evergreen screen to be planted that consists of either a hedge, planted three feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted five feet on center maximum, or other screens determined to be appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(7)  Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(8)  Compliance with co-location requirements. 
(9)  Any application to locate a Wireless Telecommunications Facility on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register, or is in the HD-Historic District Overlay, shall be subject to review by the City's Historic District Commission. 
(10)  The tower shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Except for tower or monopole structures, all appurtenances shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment. 
(11)  No advertising is permitted anywhere on the Wireless Telecommunications Facility, with the exception of identification signage. 
(12)  No tower under 150 feet shall be artificially lighted except to assure safety or as required by the FAA. 
(13)  "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around the Wireless Telecommunications Facility with a telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency. 
(14)  Underground equipment shelters are encouraged, and may be requested by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(15)  Towers must be designed and certified by an Engineer to be structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the Ohio Basic Building Code. 
(c)  Any Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which are not attached to a tower shall be a permitted ancillary use to any commercial, industrial, or professional structure, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located and a zoning certificate shall be required and issued provided that the person making such ancillary use files a written certification with the City establishing the following: 
(1)  The total height of the antenna support structure and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities do not exceed the structural height limitations in the applicable zoning district by more than 20 feet; 
(2)  The antenna support structure and Wireless Telecommunications Facilities comply with the Ohio Basic Building Code; 
(3)  Any Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances, located on the roof of a building, are set back one foot from the edge of the roof, not including the penthouse, for each one foot in height of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. However, this setback requirement shall not apply to antennas less than two inches in thickness, which are mounted to the sides of antenna support structures, but which do not protrude more than six inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. This requirement is subject to change by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon review of the photosimulation provided in compliance with Section 1153.04(b)(3). 
(4)  That the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities will utilize camouflaging techniques or will be side-mounted to an antenna support structure in order that the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities harmonize with the character and environment of the area in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.05 - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
(a)  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be a permitted use within the PI-Planned Industrial District subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Sole use on a lot: A Wireless Telecommunications Facility is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the following: 
A.  Minimum street frontage. 200 feet 
B.  Minimum yard requirements. 
Tower: The minimum distance to any single-family or two family residential use or zoning district lot line shall be 200 feet. 
Equipment Shelter: 
Side Yard: 50 feet 
Rear Yard: 30 feet 
Front yard: 60 feet 
C.  Maximum height. 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna) 
Equipment Shelter: 35 feet and no more than 2 stories 
D.  Maximum size of Equipment Shelter. 
400 square feet for a single shelter, or, if there is more than one, 800 total square feet. 
(2)  Combined with another use: A Wireless Telecommunications Facility is permitted on a property with an existing use subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The existing or future use on the property may be any permitted use in the district or any lawful nonconforming use, and need not be affiliated with the Wireless Telecommunications Facility will not be considered an addition to the structure or value of a nonconforming use. 
B.  The Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance (except during construction or an emergency). 
C.  Minimum lot area. 
The minimum lot area shall be the area needed to accommodate the Tower (and guy wires, if used), the Equipment Shelter, security fencing and buffer planting. 
D.  Minimum yard requirements. 
Tower: The minimum distance to any single-family or two-family residential use or district lot line shall be 200 feet. 
Equipment Shelter: Shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the primary lot. 
E.  Access. The service access to the Equipment Shelter shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use. 
F.  Maximum height. 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna) 
Equipment Shelter: 35 feet or no more than two stories. 
G.  Maximum size of Equipment Shelter. 
400 square feet for a single shelter, or, if there is more than one, 800 square feet. 
(3)  Combined with an existing structure: Where possible, an antenna for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be attached to an existing structure or building subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Maximum height. 
20 feet or 20 percent of the building height above the existing building or structure, whichever is greater. 
B.  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate equipment shelter (not located on, or attached to, the building), the equipment shelter shall comply with the following: 
1.  The minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
2.  A buffer yard may be planted in accordance with Section 1153.04(b)(5). 
3.  Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use. 
4.  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 400 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 800 total square feet. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.06 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
(a)  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that include towers are not permitted in single-family or two-family residential districts with the exception of placement on any municipal property located in either of these two districts. However, antennas attached to existing buildings or structures are permitted. In applying for a permit in any residential district, the applicant must present sufficient evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts have been exhausted, a Wireless Telecommunications Facility may be located in a residential district subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  General: The Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance. This shall apply to subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5) below. 
(2)  Combined with a nonresidential use: An antenna may be attached to a nonresidential building or a structure that is a permitted use in the district; including, but not limited to, a church, a municipal or governmental building or facility, agricultural building, and a building or structure owned by a utility. The following conditions shall be met: 
A.  Maximum height: 20 feet above the existing building or structure. 
B.  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate equipment shelter, the equipment shelter shall comply with the following: 
1.  The equipment shelter shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
2.  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 400 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 800 total square feet. 
3.  A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with Section 1153.06(b)(5). 
4.  Vehicular access to the equipment shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use. 
(3)  Located on a nonresidential use property: A tower to support an antenna may be constructed on a property with a nonresidential use that is a permitted use within the district, including but not limited to a church, hospital, school, municipal or government building, facility or structure, agricultural use and a utility use, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The tower shall be set back from any property line abutting a single-family or two-family residential lot by 200 feet. 
B.  Maximum height. 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna) 
Equipment Shelter: 35 feet or no more than two stories. 
C.  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 400 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 800 total square feet. 
D.  Vehicular access to the tower and equipment shelter shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use. 
E.  In order to locate a telecommunications facility on a property that is vacant or with an agricultural use the tract shall be at least 2.5 acres, or as otherwise determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(4)  Located in open space: A Wireless Telecommunications Facility is permitted on land that has been established as permanent open space, or a park subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The open space shall be owned by the municipality, county or state government, a homeowners association, charitable organization, or a private, non-profit conservation organization. 
B.  Maximum height. 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna) 
Equipment Shelter: 35 feet or no more than two stories 
C.  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 400 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 800 total square feet. 
D.  The tower shall be set back from any single-family or two-family property line 200 feet. 
(5)  Requirements for dish-type signal receiving antennas: A Zoning Certificate is required to be issued for the installation of dish-type signal receiving antennas within a residential district pursuant to the following requirements: 
A.  Dish-type antennas one meter or less in diameter shall be located at the rear 50 percent of the residence and obscured from view from the public right-of-way. If attached to a structure, the dish shall match the color of the structure at which it is attached. Dish-type antennas shall be secured so that they can withstand wind or other weather-related factors. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.07 - CRITERIA FOR A CONDITIONAL USE. 
(a)  Wireless Telecommunications Facility. A Wireless Telecommunications Facility which includes a tower may be permitted as a conditional use in a PC-Planned Commercial District or in an open space as stated in Section 1153.06. In order to be considered for review, the applicant must prove that a newly-constructed tower is necessary because co-location on an existing tower is not feasible in accordance with Section 1153.08. The following steps must also be taken for the application to be considered for review in this category: 
(1)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the Telecommunications Tower must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area. There shall be an explanation of why a tower and this proposed site is technically necessary. 
(2)  Where the Wireless Telecommunications Facility is located on a property with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property supports the application and that the vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
(3)  The applicant shall present a site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities on the site; showing the location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; and indicating type and locations of plant materials used to screen the facilities and the proposed color of the facilities. 
(4)  Applicant shall present a signed statement indicating: 
A.  The applicant agrees to allow for the potential co-location of additional Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by other providers on the applicant's structure or within the same site location; and 
B.  The applicant agrees to remove the facility within 180 days after the site's use is discontinued. 
(b)  A Conditional Use Permit may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals with a subsequent Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for construction of new towers in non-industrial districts. Co-location of antennas on a single tower, antennas attached to existing structures/buildings, towers located in industrial districts, or replacement towers to be constructed at the site of a current tower are permitted uses and will not be subject to the Conditional Use permitting process. 
(c)  Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a Wireless Telecommunications Facility and/or Tower shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.08 - CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Public Property First. 
(1)  In order to encourage the location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities on publicly-owned property, the City shall undertake an identification of publicly owned properties that the City determines are suitable for such use. The City shall regularly update such identification and make the results of such identification available to the public. 
(2)  Persons locating Wireless Telecommunications Facilities upon such identified publicly-owned properties shall be exempted from the requirements herein regarding presentation of proof that co-location of facilities on towers or structures owned by other persons or in other locations is not available. However, persons locating Wireless Telecommunications Facilities on publicly-owned properties shall continue to be subject to the requirements contained in subsection (b) below. 
(3)  In addition, persons locating Wireless Telecommunications Facilities on publicly owned properties identified by the City to be suitable for such purposes may request that the requirements of Section 1153.04(b)(1) through (b)(3) and Section 1153.07(a)(2) through (a)(4) be waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  No new tower shall be constructed in the City unless such tower is capable of accommodating at least one additional Wireless Telecommunications Facility owned by other persons. 
(c)  A Conditional Use Permit shall be issued only if there is not technically suitable space reasonably available on an existing tower or structure within the geographic area to be served. With the permit application, the applicant shall list the location of every tower, building, or structure within such area that could support the proposed antenna. The applicant must demonstrate that a technically suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing tower, building or structure. If another communication tower is technically suitable, applicant must show that it has offered to allow the owner to co-locate an antenna on another tower within the city owned by applicant on reciprocal terms and the offer was not accepted or the other tower is presumed to be reasonably available. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.09 - ABANDONMENT OF TOWER. 
(a)  All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the Zoning Administrator notifying them of any tower facility located in the municipality whose use will be discontinued and the date this use will cease. If at any time the use of the facility is discontinued for 180 days, a designated local official may declare the facility abandoned. (This excludes any dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the facility.) The facility's owner/operator will receive written notice from the Zoning Administrator and be instructed to either reactivate the facility's use within 180 days, or dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not occur, the municipality will remove or will contract to have removed the facility and assess the owner/operator the costs. 
(b)  The City must provide the tower owner three months notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Commission before initiating such action. After such notice has been provided, the City shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to either acquire the tower and any appurtenances attached thereto at the then fair market value, or in the alternative, order the demolition of the tower and all appurtenances. 
(c)  The City shall provide the tower owner with the right to a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission, which public hearing shall follow the three month notice required in subsection (b) hereof. All interested parties shall be allowed an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. 
(d)  After a public hearing is held pursuant to subsection (c) hereof, the Commission may order the acquisition or demolition of the tower. The City may require licensee to pay for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish the tower. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.10 - VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    Any request to deviate from any of the requirements of this chapter shall require variance approval in conformance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1127 of the Codified Ordinances of Powell. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.11 - MISCELLANEOUS. 
(a)  Non-Waiver. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Municipality from exercising any right or remedy it may have in law or equity to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(b)  Severability. If any provision of this chapter or the application of any provision of this chapter to any person is, to any extent, held invalid or unenforceable by a tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such holding. In case of such an event, this chapter and all of its remaining provisions shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective. In the event the law invalidating such a chapter provision is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or is otherwise changed so that the provision which had previously been held invalid or unenforceable, no longer conflicts with the laws, rules or regulations then in effect, the previously invalid or unenforceable provision shall return to full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.12 - PENALTY. 
    Penalties and fines set forth in Section 1135.20 of the Codified Ordinances apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
1153.13 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. 
(Ord. No. 97-46, 12-2-1997) 
CHAPTER 1155 - BED AND BREAKFAST INNS 
Sections: 

1155.01 - PURPOSE. 
    Bed and breakfast inns are unique semi-commercial operations that adapt a residential environment into a lodging concept limited in scope and operation. The regulations presented here provide a systematic set of requirements to ensure that such operations, if appropriate for a residential or commercial area, shall not adversely impact adjacent uses as a result of the commercial aspects of the structure and property. Bed and breakfast inns shall be subordinate to the principal use of a single-family dwelling. The intent is not to provide an opportunity for the establishment of an intensive commercial lodging business that would be considered appropriate within an intensive commercial or planned commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 99-43, 9-30-1999) 
1155.02 - DEFINITION. 
    For the purpose of the Zoning Code, a "bed and breakfast inn" means an owner-occupied residential single-family detached structure where lodging and meals are provided to transient guests for compensation in accordance with the development standards of this chapter. The provision of lodging and breakfast shall be subordinate to the principal use of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 99-43, 9-30-1999) 
1155.03 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  A Bed and breakfast inn is classified as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: 
DR, Downtown Residence District 
DB - Downtown Business District 
PC - Planned Commercial 
(b)  The corresponding standards and requirements of Chapter 1129 thereby apply. Such conditional use permits shall be voided upon the sale or transfer of the property ownership. In submitting an application for conditional use permit, the applicant shall provide to the Board of Zoning Appeals a floor plan illustrating the proposed operation, a site plan indicating all on-site improvements, and any additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator or Board. 
(Ord. No. 99-43, 9-30-1999; Ord. No. 2017-60 ,  1, 12-19-2017) 
1155.04 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
    The following development standards apply to bed and breakfast inns that are conditional uses within single-family zoning districts. 
(a)  Guest Rooms. There shall be no more than four guest rooms within a single-family dwelling that are utilized by bed and breakfast guests. A guest room shall contain no less than 100 square feet of living space, not including closets, for two guests and 30 square feet for additional guest up to a total of four guests. 
(b)  Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room and one off-street parking space for the dwelling unit. Such off-street parking spaces may be provided in an existing driveway. 
(c)  Signage. One on-premises sign shall be permitted for each bed and breakfast inn not to exceed six square feet in area. The sign shall not be internally illuminated. Such signs shall be limited to three colors. The applicable standards of Chapter 1151 shall apply unless otherwise superseded by this section. 
(d)  Employees. Not more than one nonresident for every three guest rooms of the dwelling may be employed in the operation of a bed and breakfast Inn. 
(Ord. No. 99-43, 9-30-1999) 
1155.05 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
(a)  Single-Family Detached Dwelling. Bed and breakfast inns shall only be permitted with a conditional use permit in single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Owner/Operator. The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall live full-time on the inn's premises. Such owner/operator shall be the record owner of no less than 60 percent interest of the property in question. 
(c)  Architectural Review. All new construction and exterior alterations associated with the bed and breakfast inn, including nonstructural improvements, shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or inside the Historic District by the Historic District Commission. Such approval is required prior to review of the conditional use permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals. All such improvements shall be completed prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(d)  Certificate of Fire and Health Offices. Certificates from the Liberty Township Fire Department and the Delaware County Board of Health shall be required for each conditional use permit requesting approval for a bed and breakfast inn. Each guest room shall contain a separate installed smoke detector alarm approved by the Fire Officer. No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast inn unless there are at least two separate exits to the outdoors. 
(e)  Consecutive Nights. Each paying guest may stay at a bed and breakfast inn for not more than seven consecutive nights at any single visit nor more than a total of 45 in any given calendar year. 
(f)  Kitchen Facilities. Only one kitchen facility shall be permitted per structure for which a conditional use permit is granted to operate a bed and breakfast inn. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in individual guest quarters. 
(g)  Bathrooms. A minimum of one full bathroom, including shower, toilet, and sink, shall be required for every two guest rooms to be available for the exclusive use of bed and breakfast paying guests. Bed and breakfast inns shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer and water service. 
(h)  Guest Register. A guest register listing the name, address and phone number of all paying guests shall be maintained by the owner/manager and shall be made available for inspection by City Officials. 
(i)  Special Gatherings. Rental of the bed and breakfast inn to other than registered guests for special gatherings such as wedding receptions and parties shall require a special permit approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(j)  Business License. A business license shall be required to be obtained from the Municipality of Powell prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(k)  Public Nuisance. Bed and breakfast inns shall not be permitted and a conditional use permit shall be revoked or suspended by the Board of Zoning Appeals if the use is found to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 99-43, 9-30-1999) 
APPENDICES - ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Introduction 
This compilation of Standards and Guidelines is for the use the Historic District Commission in approving or disapproving applications for Certificates of Appropriateness in the Historic District Overlay District, and for the use of residents and owners of property in the City of Powell who are contemplating exterior modifications to existing buildings or new construction within the Historic District Overlay District. 
This work begins by outlining the boundaries of the Historic District Overlay Zone, as created in the City of Powell Zoning Ordinance. The first section describes the City of Powell, and those elements which create its unique character. A series of guidelines follow which illustrate appropriate materials and methods for the preservation of existing architecture, and new construction in the Historic District Overlay District. These guidelines are based on the existing character of Powell, and research into construction methods and materials typical of late 19th and early 20th century vernacular, Midwestern architecture. 
These guidelines are not intended to substitute for expert advice from a qualified architect, engineer or contractor. The primary purpose of these Standards and Guidelines is to provide a basis on which to evaluate the appropriateness of proposed modifications or new construction within Powell's Historic District. A very important secondary purpose is to educate owners, residents, and government officials about the character of Powell and the means by which to preserve that character. 
The Historic District 
The boundaries of Powell's Historic District Overlay District correspond roughly to the original corporation limits of the City. The Historic District was originally established by Resolution Number 87-40 of the Powell City Council on November 10, 1987. The Powell Historic District Overlay District will be referred to as the "Historic District throughout this Guide. 
History 
The land upon which the City of Powell now stands was part of a 4000 acre land grant given to James Parker in 1800 to satisfy warrants for military service. The earliest settlers to the area came from Connecticut. They named the main north-south street through their community Middlebury Street, and the settlement came to be known as Middlebury. 
In 1839, Thomas R. Hall purchased the land around the tiny City. Hall started a small store at the main crossroads in about 1850, and began calling the settlement "Hall Corners". At this time, residents received their mail by carrier, who delivered it on foot or by horseback to the general store for the residents to pick up themselves. After a few years of this crude system, the town decided to apply for its own post office. With the help of Judge Thomas W. Powell, of Delaware, Ohio, a post office was established in the community in 1857. In gratitude, Middlebury/Hall Corners was renamed Powell. 

The Columbus and Toledo Railroad was incorporated in 1872, and a few years later, tracks were laid on the west side of the City. In 1876, the town of Powell was laid out, defined by the intersection of Olentangy Street (Powell Road) and Liberty Street, as it is to this day. 

Why Preserve Powell? 
The City of Powell retains much of its small crossroads town atmosphere today, but development is beginning to threaten this image. As the city of Columbus spreads to the north, land values in southern Delaware County are increasing, and the suburbs of Columbus are encroaching on the City. This growth will bring new business and more visitors to Powell. The expansion will strengthen the economy, but will threaten the very character which makes Powell an attractive place to visit and live. 
In the recent past, small cities in similar circumstances have been swallowed by surrounding development because they were considered "too ordinary" or "not old enough" to be of interest. An important part of our history, that of "everyman", has been lost through failure to preserve these small towns. 

Powell is one of these small towns which has not been lost! The City contains many excellent examples of vernacular Midwestern architecture of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. With its small town, rural atmosphere still very much intact, Powell provides an important look into the everyday lives of small town residents at the turn of the century. 
Another of the charms of a City like Powell is the sense of growth over time which it displays. One can read history in these changes. Through careful planning and supervision of development Powell can continue to grow and change to meet the needs of modern living, while maintaining its basic character and integrity. 
Architectural Character 
Powell, Ohio is a small, Midwestern town, rural in nature. Narrow streets, small, simple houses, and tree lined streets create the rural charm of Powell. The Historic District consists primarily of two main roads, Olentangy and Liberty streets, which intersect at the commercial center. A series of smaller residential streets and alleys complete the street pattern. Farms of varying sizes, along with new housing subdivisions, surround the Historic District. The historic building stock of Powell is primarily residential with some small commercial buildings clustered around the major intersection, and a few industrial buildings lining the railroad tracks. Existing significant public buildings include the two story brick schoolhouse at 80 South Liberty Street, the Odd Fellows Hall at 5 South Liberty Street, and the old Post Office at 14 West Olentangy Street. 

Most of the buildings in the City are frame construction, finished in wood. Powell has a few masonry buildings. Most brick buildings are commercial or public in nature, except for a couple of unusual glazed block residences. "High style" buildings are designed according to the dictates of a specific, readily identifiable, national or international architectural style. Powell's buildings represent rural, vernacular versions of several late 19th and early 20th century high styles. Some City buildings are simple, common building forms decorated by elements from one or more historical styles. Others represent common building types with simple detailing, which do not reflect any particular architectural style. Although they are not ornate, high style structures, Powell's buildings exhibit fine craftsmanship and sound historical construction techniques. 
Architectural Styles and Elements 
Italianate 

Characteristics of this style include asymmetrical plans, with octagonal bay windows or projections, shallow, hipped roofs, and carved porches Ornamentation includes curved, carved brackets under roof overhangs and cornices, and hood moldings over doors and windows. Windows are almost always tall and thin in proportion Examples of Italianate architecture in Powell include the Odd Fellow's Hall (5 South Liberty Street), with its prominent cornice supported by elaborate brackets; the brick schoolhouse (80 South Liberty Street), with its shallow hipped roof and segmental arched windows; and 38 West Olentangy Street, with its bay window, porch with carved brackets, and hood molding. All of these buildings exhibit the vertical window proportion typical of the Italianate style. 
Queen Anne 

Irregular massing and complex rooflines are the primary characteristics of this style. Roofs give the overall impression of steepness, but often contain sections of varying pitches. Chimneys are of ten treated as prominent elements,and become part of the roof composition. Wall surfaces exhibit a variety of textures and colors, combining siding, patterned shingles and visible rough stone foundations. Porches, bay and oriel windows are used to further enliven the facades. Windows occur in a variety of shapes and proportions. A group of three windows, with the center one taller or arched, is a common detail. Other detailing is classical and small in scale. The best example of the Queen Anne Style in Powell is found at 147 West Olentangy street. 
Stick style 

The primary aim of buildings of this style was to promote "truthfulness" in construction by exposing or representing the structural frame. Buildings of this style were always wood frame construction and were faced in wood siding or patterned shingles. Roof eaves project considerably, often supported by diagonal braces, and framing members are sometimes exposed in gable ends. The detailing on 57 Case Street suggests the roof framing members. The overhang is also supported by diagonal bracing and the gable is faced with patterned wood shingles. This gable sheltered a porch, which has been enclosed. The original house is faced in wood siding. 
Eastlake 

The Eastlake style is almost purely a style of ornamentation, which often appears on buildings otherwise classified as Queen Anne or Stick Style. Ornamentation is a product of the chisel, gouge and lathe, and has a robust, three dimensional character. Curved brackets are used profusely, and many elements bear a marked resemblance to furniture parts. Posts and balusters resemble table legs, while knobs and motifs of circular perforations borrow from the art of cabinetmaking. The porch at 15 North Liberty Street is Powell's most exhuberant example of Eastlake detailing. 
Bungalow 

True bungalows are one story dwellings, with the roof space made habitable by dormers or gable windows. The term is also used to describe buildings which do their best to look like one story dwellings, while actually providing a full height second story. Host of Powell's bungalows are actually two story, simple in form and detailing, and would be considered "Dormer Front" types. These have a large, low, pitched roof, with the ridge parallel to the street. The roof often continues beyond the front wall to shelter a porch. In most cases, the front and back of the roof slope at different pitches and a dormer usually projects from the center of the front slope. Two of Powell's bungalows are located at 120 South Liberty Street and 71 West Olentangy Street. 
Site Considerations 
The atmosphere of Powell is that of a rural small town at the turn of the century. The City is not purely urban or suburban in nature, but, with increased development, some of the amenities of the city and its suburbs will become necessary. The site guidelines which follow share two primary goals: 
1.  Maintain the rural City character of Powell's Historic District. 
2.  The provision of necessary modern conveniences, which may not be characteristic of historic Powell, and use these contemporary improvements as opportunities to enhance and unify the character of the Historic District. 
Roads And Drives 

Access to rear yard parking lots and storage or garage buildings should be from alleys whenever possible. If no such access is possible, private parking and roads should be designed to require the least amount of surface. Drives should be the shortest length possible and the minimum width necessary. Access roads should be located as unobtrusively as possible, and landscaping should be planned to soften their impact. Commercial drives should be paved with asphalt, brick, concrete, or tar and chips, as required in the Powell Zoning Code. Gravel or brick is the preferred material for residential drives, but asphalt, concrete, or tar and chips may be acceptable. 
Parking 
Parking for residences turned into businesses or newly constructed businesses along Olentangy and Liberty Streets shall be provided at rear yard areas. Parking areas should be only as large as necessary to provide a reasonable number of parking spaces as determined by applicable code requirements. Commercial lots should be paved with asphalt, brick, concrete, or tar and chips as required in the Powell Zoning Code. Gravel or brick are preferred materials for residential parking areas, but asphalt, concrete, or tar and chips may be acceptable. 
Sidewalks 
Most turn of the century rural towns, such as Powell would have had boardwalks in commercial areas, and gravel or dirt paths in residential areas. Some type of contemporary, all weather path must be provided to allow for increased pedestrian traffic along Olentangy Street and at the Center of the City. Sidewalks should be provided along Olentangy Street from the Martin Perry house on the east to the railroad tracks on the west. Sidewalks should also be provided in front of the commercial buildings along Liberty Street, near the intersection with Olentangy Street (see map next page for location). 
In front of the commercial buildings at the center of town (see map) sidewalks should extend to the edge of the street. Sidewalks in these locations will require curbs and gutters. New or salvaged stone curbs or concrete curbs may be used. In residential areas of the City, sidewalks should be set back from the edge of the road by a strip of grass. Curbs and gutters may be provided in these areas if necessary to ensure safety or proper storm drainage. Sidewalks in all areas of the historic district should be concrete. 
Curbs And Gutters 
Paved roads with curbs and gutters are not historically accurate in cities such as Powell. With increased traffic in the City, asphalt surfaced roads have become necessary. Curbs and gutters may be required in some locations, such as areas where sidewalks extend to the edge of the street. Where curbs and gutters are necessary, curb cuts for handicapped access should be provided as required by state and local codes. 

Setbacks 

Most buildings in Powell are set back approximately 20 to 40 feet from the road with modest front lawns. The exceptions are the commercial buildings at the corner of Olentangy and Liberty Streets, which are built right up to 272 their property lines at the sidewalks. Rear yards are generally long and narrow. Residential buildings on adjacent lots throughout the City are set approximately 20 feet apart from each other at their sides. New construction should follow the setback lines appropriate to its location and purpose. 
Lighting 
One of the charms of rural areas is the complete darkness of nightfall away from the 24 hour light of the city. However, proper lighting fixtures can increase the safety of Powell, and may become more necessary as development continues. 

Exterior Historic lighting District in should the be incandescent, and low in wattage. Entrance lights and individual free standing path lights are acceptable. Lighting fixtures should be simple Victorian or turn of the century in design, with round or the commercial buildings along Liberty Street, near the intersection with Olentangy Street (see map next page for location) egg-shaped globes on metal posts with minimal detailing. Colonial style "coach lights" are not appropriate in the historic district. These types belong to an earlier historical period, and generally belong on coaches. 

Free standing, pole mounted lamps may be used to light paths or drives. These lights should not be taller than the height of the first story of adjacent buildings. Metal posts should be painted in dark, muted colors such as black, brown, or dark green. The more elaborate the shape of the globe, the simpler the detailing of the post should be. Simple globes can be mounted on more detailed posts. All pole mounted lights should be individual. Clusters of lights are not acceptable in the historic district. 

Contemporary lights which incorporate simple, round or oval globes and modest posts or brackets may be appropriate in the Historic District. Frosted globes should be used in all lights in the Historic District, as they will provide softer light than clear globes. 
Signage and Graphics 
Proposed signage should be in harmony with the building to which it is attached. Size, scale, material, texture, color, style and location should be appropriate to both the building itself and the purpose of the graphics. Appropriate signage should convey the name and purpose of the business in a direct manner, using small, simple letters. Logos and graphics should be small, straightforward, and kept to a minimum. The following themes are suggested for these elements: 
-History  of the City of Powell. 
-History  building graphics related to the specific to which the are attached 
-The  traditions of a business represented by sign. 
-Symbols  or images from turn of the century rural America. 

Internally illuminated signs should not be used in the Historic District. Exterior illumination is discouraged unless it is incandescent, very low in wattage and designed as an integral part of the sign. 
Wood is the preferred material for signs, and all graphics should employ subtle and natural colors, such as those outlined in the section on painting and colors. 
Building Mounted Signs 
Signs should not cover or obscure any doors, windows or other architectural features. On residential scale buildings, signs should not be placed higher than the tops of first story openings or the eave line of a one story wing or porch. On commercial scale buildings, signs may be placed within a sign band above the first floor, or at the cornice line if the graphics integrate carefully with the cornice detailing. 
Projecting Signs 

These signs may not project more than 2 feet from the face of a building to which they are mounted, or 3 feet from a free-standing support to which they are mounted. Projecting signs may not be more than 15 inches in height or 5 square feet in area. A minimum clearance of 8 feet must be maintained where signs project over a public walkway. Supporting structures for signs should be appropriate to the detailing of the buildings to which they are attached. 
Flags and Banners 
Permanent banners must follow the same guidelines as other signage and graphics. Temporary flags and banners, which are not specifically prohibited in the Powell Zoning code, or which do not require a zoning permit, are not subject to these restrictions. Proper display of the United States, State of Ohio, or other historical 'flag is encouraged. All flags and banners which project over a public walkway should maintain a minimum clearance of 8 feet. 
Free Standing Signs 

Height should not exceed the first story of adjacent buildings. Overall size should not exceed 12 square feet. Supporting structures should be simple in design and in character with the adjacent buildings. No more than three ground in the colors may be used in signs, as is stated zoning regulations. 
Accessory Buildings 
Automobile garages, storage sheds, and other dependent buildings must be located at the rear of the property, with entry facing away from major streets, although access from an "alley" is permissible. The accessory building should be compatible with the building it serves in massing, materials, and basic color scheme, but it should not be an exact copy of the main building. An accessory building should be obviously subservient to the building it is serving. This means that it should be smaller in scale and simpler in detail than the main building. 

Roof type, roof pitch and rhythm of openings should harmonize with those elements of the main building. Materials should be similar in nature and scale, although not necessarily in refinement. For example, a house with special wood siding and shingles might have a garage with simpler wood siding. Special attention must be given to the relationship in scale and location between accessory buildings and the buildings they serve. 
Fences 
The preferred treatment for definition of property boundaries within Powell's Historic District is the use of landscape elements such as low hedges, corner or edge plantings, and lines of trees. Fencing of entire yards or portions of them is discouraged within the Historic District unless it is necessary for the safety of the owners and the community, or to meet applicable code requirements. These fences should be the minimum height necessary to serve their purpose. 
Tall, privacy fences should be limited to rear yards. These should be constructed of wood, and stained in a natural wood color. Board or board-and board ("good neighbor") fence styles are appropriate where required for privacy or safety. Small pieces of fence which define corners, edges, entries, or paths are acceptable in front yards, especially if they are integrated parts of landscape features. Front yard fences may not be higher than 3 feet tall. front yards in the Historic District. These fences should be stained in a natural color or painted cream or white. All fences in Powell's Historic District should be built out of wood, and be simple in design. Very ornate fences, with intricate patterns, or overly rustic fences, built of hand hewn lumber, are not appropriate. Wire fences are not appropriate in the Historic District. 

Landscaping 
Street trees should be planted along Olentangy Street between th east and west boundaries of the City, and along Liberty Street, between the north and south boundaries of the City. The planting of street trees elsewhere is also encouraged. Street trees should be planted approximately 25 feet apart and 3 to 4 feet from the sidewalk. It is recommended that the trees be planted in the lawn panels between the buildings and the sidewalk. Trees in this location will be less likely to send roots under a sidewalk. A variety of street trees should be planted in order to ensure that the tree line will survive the failure of one species. The following species are recommended for their resistance to the stress of traffic: 
Common Name Latin Name Size Comments Hedge Maple Acer campestre 35'-45' Arastrong Red Maple Acer rubrum "Armstrong" Columnar Scarlet Oak Quercus coccinea 45' + Shumard Oak Quercus shumardii 45' + White Oak Quercus alba 45' + Swamp White Oak Quercus bicolor 45' + Shingle Oak Quercus imbricaria 45' + Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa 45' + English Oak Quercus robur 45' + Pyramidal English Oak Quercus robur "Fastigiata" Columnar Pin Oak Quercus paluatris 45' + Selected Seed Sources Hybrid Elm Ulmus x Chinese Elm Ulmus parvifolia 45' + Japanese Elm Ulmus japonica 45' + American Beech Fagus grandifolia 45' + Danwyck European Beech Fagus sylvatica "Danwyck" 45' + Slow Growing Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica 45' + Moneylocust (thornless) Gleditsia triacanthos 
  var. inermis 45' + Thornless Clones Ginkgos, male cultivars Ginkgo bilboa 45' + Slow Growing, expensive Kentucky Coffee Tree Gymnociadus diocius 45' + London Planetree Platanus acerifolia 45' + slow growing Red Horsechestnut Aesculus x carnea 35'-45' Littleleaf Linden Tilia cordata 35'-45' Turkish Hazel Corylus colurna 35'-45' Callery Pears Pyrus calleryana  "Autumn Blaze" 35'-45'  "Chanticleer" Columnar  "Aristocrat" 35'-45' Washington Hawthorne Crataegus phaenopyrum 10'-25' Winter King Hawthorne Crataegus viridis "Winter King" 10'-25' Vaughn Hawthorne Crataegus vaughn 10'-25' Snowdrift Crabapple Malus "Snowdrift" 10'-25' Redbud Crabapple Malus seiboldii var. zumi "Calocarpa" 10'-25' Spring Snow Crabapple Malus "Spring Snow" 10'-25' No Fruit Hardy Kobus Magnolia Magnolia Kobus Borealis 10'-25' Kwansan Oriental Cherry Prunus Serrulata "Kwanzan" 10'-25' Beautiful Flowers  
Yards should be rural in character, and use native plantings. These should be primarily grass with trees and small beds of native cultivated or wild flowers. Ornate, formal, or exotic gardens are discouraged, but may be acceptable if they are not along main roads, are hidden from public views, or can be blended into a more native landscape. Utilitarian kitchen, vegetable, and herb gardens are encouraged, but should be located in a logical place, such as the rear or side of the house, near the kitchen or rear entry. 

Foundation and wall climbing plants, such as ivy, can damage historic materials. Such plantings should be kept to a minimum and carefully controlled. On existing structures, foundation and wall plantings should not endanger or obscure significant architectural features, or historic fabric. On new construction, such plantings should not be used to hide inappropriate material or lack of proper detailing. 
Building Materials 
Building materials are very important in establishing the historic character of a structure. This is especially true in smaller towns such as Powell, where most buildings exhibit simple detailing and minimal decoration. Materials can contribute the qualities of texture, pattern, tone and color to the surfaces of a building. Texture refers to the tactile qualities of a material, such as its relative roughness or smoothness. Patterns are regularly repeated motifs, shapes, or forms, which often have the effect of texture. Host patterns and textures are formed by the traditional methods of laying units of construction material, such as bricks, siding, slate, or shingles. Tone refers to the relative darkness or lightness of a material or color, such as the varying grays of slate. Color can be inherent in the material, such as red brick, or can be applied, like paint to siding. More specific information on color, tone and historic painting schemes can be found in the section on Color and Painting. Building materials, with their qualities of texture, pattern, tone and color become character defining features on many of Powell's simpler buildings. 
Foundations 
The foundation of a building is the masonry substructure upon which a building rests. A sound foundation is vital to the structural integrity of a building. A foundation has two major enemies, settlement and moisture. Settlement refers to the movement of ground beneath the building. When this occurs, the foundation responds to the movement, and attempts to adjust to the new lay of the land. This change in position can cause cracks in the masonry units or mortar joints. Host buildings settle gradually over the years, or soon after they are constructed. Hairline cracks or cracks which appear old (filled with debris) are not generally a source of concern. New or newly patched cracks in the foundation, walls which bow inward, daylight between the base of the house and the foundation, and cracks around door or window frames are all signs of potential trouble. Excess water at the foundation can cause innumerable problems ranging from structural failure or flooding due to disintegration of mortar, to deterioration of. Exterior sheathing materials and interior finishes, due to "rising damp". 

One of the major causes of excess moisture at the foundation is improper drainage of water at the roof. All roof surfaces, gutters, and downspouts should be inspected periodically to make sure that water is draining properly. Water runoff should not splash against the exterior wall of a building. Gutters and downspouts should be kept clear of debris and in good condition to avoid this problem. Inadequate ventilation of basements or crawl spaces, and improper grading at the foundation are other major causes of excess moisture. All underground spaces should be vented, or dehumidified. Ground should slope away from the foundation, to prevent water from pooling against the masonry. 
Foundation plantings (trees and shrubs planted against a building) are not historically correct and can cause serious damage to historic masonry. These plants hold moisture in their root systems which can weaken mortar. They will rob clay soil of its moisture, opening cracks near the foundation, in which water may pool and, eventually freeze. 

A weakened foundation can threaten the very structure of a building. Old foundations should be inspected periodically for signs of deterioration. Appropriate corrective 1995 Replacement 292 steps, such as repainting of mortar, regrading of soil to ensure drainage, and ventilation of underground spaces can solve many foundation problems, In the case of extreme structural or moisture concerns, consult an engineer or architect. The foundations of Powell's buildings are built out of limestone, concrete block, or glazed block, with about 1 to 2 feet exposed above grade. The oldest foundations are limestone laid in a random or coursed rubble pattern. Later, limestone was roughly shaped into rectangular blocks, but maintained its natural or rock face. Manufactured masonry units began to be used at the turn of the century. Glazed clay tile blocks and a "rock faced", cast concrete block became popular foundation materials then. 
In situations where a foundation must be entirely rebuilt, or in cases of new construction, the new foundation should be compatible with City foundation construction techniques. In the case of additions, new foundations should be as compatible with the existing ones as possible. New foundations may be built entirely out of limestone in a random rubble or coursed pattern. Although cast, "rock faced" concrete block and glazed clay tile blocks are no longer available commercially, these materials may be used if they can be found. An acceptable alternative to Powell's traditional foundations uses regular concrete block, faced above grade with rubble or coursed limestone. Another alternative is to lay regular concrete block below ground and split face concrete block (which has a rough, rock-like surface) above grade. 

In general, exposed regular concrete block is not an appropriate material for newly constructed foundations. In some cases, such as an addition to a building with a glazed block foundation, it may be the most compatible material available. In these special cases, regular concrete block may be an acceptable material for foundations in new construction. 
Masonry 
Brick 
There are a few buildings in Powell which are built entirely out of masonry. Brick is used primarily for commercial and public buildings. Older, 19th century bricks are soft and porous, due to impurities in the clay from which they are made, and variations in firing temperatures. Later, turn of the century bricks are harder, more dense, and sometimes given special texture by wire cutting. Brick walls in Powell are simple in pattern, with the bricks laid either in common or running bonds. 

Glazed Block 
Glazed block is another type of masonry used on the exterior walls of a few of Powell's residences, and the foundations of many others. Glazed block is a type of hollow clay tile which was produced in the Appalachian regions of southern Ohio and West Virginia. The blocks were manufactured out of the clay soil prevalent in those areas, and were mass produced from the 1870's to the 1930's. The blocks were fired with a salt glaze which made them durable, impervious to water, and suitable for exterior use. The finished blocks range in color from a dark red, through purple, to almost black. 
Existing Masonry 
Although masonry materials are durable and relatively maintenance free, they can be damaged by neglect or improper treatment. Existing masonry walls should be inspected periodically for structural problems or failure of mortar joints. Spalling, (splitting off of small fragments from the face of masonry units), efflorescence, (white powder stains resulting from salt deposits), broken lintels, and bulging or bowed walls can all indicate serious trouble. The advice of an expert should be sought if any of these problems are detected. 
Repointing 
Mortar is a cushion which gives a masonry wall the ability to expand or contract with temperature extremes or changing soil conditions. The mortar must be softer than the masonry units which it cushions, in order to perform properly. The oldest bricks are the softest bricks, and are laid in very soft mortar. Later, harder bricks are laid in harder mortar. Old mortar may have deteriorated over the years, from wall movement and Weather. 
First, it should be determined if any mortar deterioration has been caused by factors other than time and weather, and .these problems should be corrected. In many cases, repointing of the mortar Will be sufficient restore the visual and physical integrity of the masonry wall. 
Repainting should be done by a trained craftsman. New mortar should match the original in composition, color and detailing. Very old, very soft bricks should be repainted with a very soft mortar. Modern mortars, which are much too hard, will force the stress of wall movement into the masonry units instead of the mortar, causing the units to crack and crumble. Matching the composition of the original mortar will also help in matching the color. Many joints in 19th century brick walls were detailed with tools after the joints were laid. This "tooling" produced a variety of profiles in the joints. Repainted mortar joints should match the orig- 

Replacement Masonry 
If a masonry wall requires patching, the replacement section should match the original as closely as possible. New or salvaged masonry units should match the existing ones in size, type and texture. Bricks or blocks should match the full range of tones in the original wall. Mortar should be of the same composition and color. The units should be laid in the same bond as the originals, and the width and profile of the mortar joints should match those of the original wall. 
Cleaning 
Before cleaning a masonry wall, consider that what often appears to be dirt is actually a patina of age and weathering which the brick has acquired over time. This patina gives the masonry an aged, historic character, which contemporary manufacturers try unsuccessfully to imitate. The patina also acts as a natural sealant and helps to protect the masonry units from weathering. Most cleaning methods will remove a thin layer of the masonry itself in the process of removing "dirt". Unless pollutants are actively damaging the masonry, it is often best not to clean the wall. 
If masonry cleaning is required, the gentlest effective means should be used. In many cases, the water from a garden hose, a mild detergent, soft bristle brush, and a little "elbow grease" will vastly improve the appearance of a masonry wall. If a pressured water or steam system is considered, the lowest effective pressure should be used. 
Chemical cleaners are not recommended, because of their uncertain results, which can include permanent stains and efflorescence. If chemical cleaners are being considered, the advice of a professional should be sought, and a test patch conducted on their instructions. This is not a job for homeowners or amateurs. 
Do not sandblast masonry walls Sandblasting will literally remove the outer crust of the masonry and ruin its ability to withstand weather. Waterproof coatings are not recommended, as they interfere with masonry's natural ability to "breathe". Moisture from interior condensation can get trapped in a waterproofed wall and cause many problems. Masonry should not be painted within the Historic District. Powell's masonry walls were not traditionally painted, and paint is almost impossible to remove in the future without damaging the masonry. 
New Construction 
In the Historic District, brick should be used for commercial and public buildings only. Use sand mold red; bricks, in standard brick, sizes. These should be laid in simple bonds similar to the ones found in Powell. Very elaborate, "mosaic" brickwork is not appropriate in the Historic District. 
Wood 
Siding 

Most of the buildings in Powell are sheathed in some form of wood siding. Beveled, shiplap, and rustic sidings are used commonly. Board-and-batten siding is used occasionally for small areas of a building. Board and batten siding is more appropriate for accessory buildings or small, subordinate additions. 
Every effort should be made to retain and repair wood siding within the Historic District. Deteriorated wood siding usually appears to be in worse condition than it actually is. Many problems with paint on wood siding are caused by excess moisture. Proper ventilation of the siding will often solve this problem. In most cases, a few minor repairs with glue, nails, putty, paint, and new sections of wood, are all that is required. Often sanding and a new coat of paint will be sufficient to vastly improve the appearance of wood siding. 
Small cracks in individual boards can be repaired by filling the crack with glue or putty and nailing through the crack. Warped boards can be screwed flat, or shimmed from behind and nailed flat Deteriorated sections of siding can be cut out and replaced with a new section. 

A general gapping or looseness of the siding may a be sign that new siding is required. If the boards are not badly warped, however, renailing can solve the problem. If complete residing is necessary, it should be done in a material which matches the original siding as closely as possible in texture and pattern. New wood siding, in the same pattern as the original, is the preferred replacement material for deteriorated wood siding. 
Wood siding is a very appropriate material for new construction within the historic district. Most of the types commonly . used in the City are horizontal, with board widths of 4 to 5 inches. A few of the houses have double V rustic type siding, in which an extra groove is carved in the center of each board, giving the appearance of 2 inch board width. Wood siding used in new construction should resemble these typical siding types in profile and board width. Any wood siding used in the historic district should be painted (not stained) in colors appropriate to the district as outlined in the section on Painting and Colors. 
Wall Shingles 

Wood shingles rarely cover an entire structure in Powell's Historic District. They are used primarily as decorative accents on Queen Anne, Stick and Bungalow style buildings, and in the gables of simpler buildings. Fishscale, square, octagonal, arrow, and diamond patterned shingles are found on structures throughout the City. Occasionally, two or more patterns are used together for a lively textural effect. 

Existing wood shingles should be retained and repaired. Shingles in good condition appear as a perfect mosaic. Worn shingles appear ragged, with individual shingles broken, warped and upturned. 
Individual shingles can be replaced, but if a large number of the shingles in a small area are damaged, it may be easier to reshingle the entire area. If replacement shingles are required, the preferred solution is to use individual wood shingles which match the original ones. 
The use of wood shingles in new construction within the historic district is encouraged. Shingles should be limited to smaller areas of a structure, such as a gable or bay window. All shingles used within the district should be painted, not stained. Appropriate color schemes are outlined in the Painting and Colors section. 

Manufactured Siding 
Asbestos Shingles 
During the 1940's, many buildings in Powell were covered with asbestos shingles. These shingles were manufactured in one size, 12 inches tall by 24 inches wide, three "patterns", wavy, straight, and staggered, and a few stock colors. The thin, brittle slabs were often corrugated to resemble wood shingles. Asbestos shingles were extremely popular with homeowners of the time because they were impervious to rain and rot and highly fire resistant. 
Asbestos shingles are no longer manufactured, since it has been discovered that the fiber and dust from asbestos are hazardous to human health. The shingles, as they exist on the exterior of a building, pose no threat to human health. The safest course of action is to leave the asbestos shingles alone. 

Although these shingles may have changed the character of the buildings they cover, they are a part of the history of Powell. Their presence reflects one of the many changes the City has gone through, as well as the practicality and economy of its citizens. The removal of asbestos shingles is not encouraged, unless the condition of the original siding material has been investigated carefully. 

Removal of asbestos shingles may be appropriate in certain situations. If the asbestos shingles are in poor condition, and it has been determined that the old siding underneath is in good condition, exhibits good design, or fine craftsmanship, removal may be desirable. Asbestos shingles should not be removed with the intention of replacing the covered material with an inappropriate contemporary substitute. 
Certain precautions must be taken when working with asbestos shingles. In general, they should be kept as moist as possible to prevent particles from becoming airborne, and a respirator or mask should be worn at all times. Asbestos shingles should never be sanded, drilled or cut. Owners and contractors are Strongly encouraged to contact. 

The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency in Columbus for additional information about asbestos hazards before beginning work. 
Since asbestos shingles are no longer manufactured, the best source for replacements is salvage from another building where they have been removed. Broken shingles can be turned upside down, and the broken edge hidden under an overlapping shingle. The shingles are most vulnerable along the bottom course and at the corners. Wood trim pieces can be installed to cover broken shingles and protect others. Another possible alternative is to cut an 1/8" thick piece of fiberglass or plastic to match existing shingles, and paint it to match the rest of the wall. In most cases, asbestos shingles will take multiple coats of paint quite easily. 
Aluminum and Vinyl Siding 
The use of aluminum and vinyl siding in new construction or to replace existing wood siding should not be considered unless all other possible courses of action have been explored. Neither type of artificial siding is truly maintenance free. Aluminum dents easily and must eventually be painted. Vinyl siding can warp, tear, and crack. Neither type of siding has the true character of aged wood siding. If aluminum or vinyl siding must be used, care MUST be taken to detail it in a manner which is compatible with the wood siding types which are prevalent in the City. The replacement siding should be two to five inches in width, with a profile similar to those typically found in Powell. The siding should resemble the material it is trying to imitate. Artificial graining should be avoided as it does not appear on good wood siding. Original detailing such as fascia and soffit trim, window and door frames lintels, and sills MUST be maintained. Corner and sill boards should be retained or replicated in the new material, in dimensions which match the originals. 

Roofing 
The roof of a building is important in establishing its character. The materials which cover a roof are an important aspect of this character. Common roofing materials used in Powell include slate, metal, and asphalt shingles. 
Slate 
With a life expectancy of 100 years, slate is one of the most durable roofing materials in Powell. Slate is a thin laminated rock, which is used as a roofing and siding material. Host slate roofs exhibit a range of iridescent tones from a rosy pink, through a range of grays, to a greenish tint. 
Slate is used on both roofs and dormers in Powell's Historic District. Most of the slate used in Powell is octagonal shaped, but these octagonal slates are sometimes combined with rectangular ones to enliven the surface of a roof. 

Existing slate roofs should be retained and repaired whenever possible. In most cases, a slate roof can be repaired. A roofer who has experience with slate should be consulted before a decision to replace the slate is made. Deteriorated slates can be removed by cutting the nails which hold it in place, and sliding in a replacement slate. Any replacement slates should match the patterning and color range of the roof in which they are being placed. 
A number of artificial slate products have come on the market recently. Many of these imitation slates bear a remarkable resemblance to the genuine material. These products may be appropriate for replacement roofing or new construction, but they should be used with caution. Most of these artificial slates are new products, and their performance in field conditions has not yet been proven. 
Metal 
A few of the buildings in Powell's historic district have metal roofs. Most of these roofs are built of tin, and are either batten or standing seam types. These types of roofs were popular in rural areas in the 19th century. Every effort should be made to retain and repair existing tin roofs. 

Tin or tin-like roofs may be used as replacements on structures which currently have such roofs. If evidence can be found that a building had a tin roof historically, then a similar metal replacement would also be appropriate. Replacement roofs should match the originals in color, profile, and spacing of seams. 
Metal roofs which are similar to those typically found in Powell are appropriate for new construction. Modern metal roofing is available in a wide range of colors and profiles. 
Only silver-gray "tin" colors Are appropriate for use in the Historic district. Metal roofs other than batten or standing seam types are not appropriate for use in the district. 
Asphalt Shingles 
Many houses in the historic district have already had their roofs replaced with asphalt shingles. In many cases, these types of shingles are appropriate as replacements for slate, or for use on new construction. 
Asphalt shingles are now available in a variety of colors. Variated grays are the most appropriate for use in the historic district. The more tones of gray in the asphalt shingles, the more closely it will resemble slate's range of tones. White or very light colors should not be used. 

Asphalt shingles laid in a diamond pattern with "rolled" or thickened seams can create a roof texture which is reminiscent of octagonal patterned slate. Asphalt shingles which attempt to replicate wood shingles are not appropriate in the Historic District and should not be used. 
Massing 
Mass describes the visual effect of a solid object as seen from the outside. Mass is a three dimensional property, which has dimensions of length, width, and height. Most buildings in Powell are created from a number of masses, for example a rectangular mass for the body of the house, and a triangular one for the roof. The term massing is used in this section to describe the form and shape of the overall structure, which has been composed from simple masses. 
Building Types 
Building type massing refers to the shape and form of the main block of a structure, and its roof. All obvious additions and subordinate projections are ignored when determining the building type massing. 
Cottage 
Dwellings, of a variety of plan shapes, which are characterized by a smallness of scale and a fineness of detail. Most of these buildings are one or one and a half stories in height. They tend to be asymmetrical in plan, and do not have the appearance of one single mass which bungalows exhibit. Powell's best example of a cottage is located at 111 North Liberty Street. 

Upright and Wing 
A Two story, front (street) facing gable, (Upright) is flanked by a recessed Wing of one or one and half stories, with its gable perpendicular to the upright. A partial or full length porch often runs along the front of the wing. Typical Upright and Wings can be found at 92 East and 77 and 78 West Olentangy Street. 
Gabled Ell 

In its simplest terms, a two story house in the form of the letter "L". The ell is created by two sections with perpendicular gables which meet at a right angle. The block parallel to the street is usually wider than its perpendicular "wing", often by twice as many bays. A one story porch often runs along the block parallel to the street. Gabeled Ells are abundant in Powell. A few examples are the Martin Perry House, 57 West Olentangy Street, and 37 South Liberty Street. 
Single Gable 

Buildings of this type have one recognizable main block, rectangular proportions, and are generally two stories in height. The entire main block is capped with a simple roof, with its single gable facing the street. Proportions may vary slightly from elongated, with a very narrow front, to almost square. A one story porch may run either along the entire width of the front, or surround three sides. These elements are always subordinate to the main rectangular mass. Two of Powell's Single Gables are 40 case street, and 57 Scioto Street. 
American Four Square 

Houses of this type are square in plan, cubical in shape, and two stories in height. Four Squares are usually capped by a low, hipped roof. A dormer, also low and square in proportion, is usually centered in the front slope of the roof. Often, a low, stocky, porch extends across the front of the house. 119 North and 110 South Liberty Street are two of Powell's American Four Squares. 
Bungalow 

Bungalows are technically one story houses with dormers or gable windows to light the roof space. However, many one and a half and two story houses of the early twentieth century were designed to have a one story appearance. These "bungalows" have low, horizontal proportions. Most bungalows have the appearance of one single block, achieved through the use of a massive roof, which may extend beyond the outside walls of a house to shelter any porches. The only interruption to the mass may be a single dormer, often centered in the front. Two examples of Bungalows in Powell can be found at 236 South Liberty Street and 71 West Olentangy Street. 
Commercial Building 
These buildings generally appear taller than the surrounding two story residences. Most are actually two stories tall, but each story is slightly taller than a standard residential story. Their flat or slightly sloped roofs and boxy massing also contribute to the sense of greater height. One story commercial buildings may achieve an appearance of extra height by the use of a taller front wall which projects above the roof line of the back and sides of the buildings. Most of Powell's commercial type buildings can be found near the corner of Olentangy and Liberty streets. 
Irregular 
Buildings whose main massing, discounting obvious additions, and subordinate projections, does not fall neatly into one of the above categories. Queen Anne style buildings, such as 147 West Olentangy Street, are almost always irregularly massed. 
New Construction 
New construction, which is in harmony with the existing character of Powell is encouraged within the Historical District. This does not mean that new buildings must be exact copies of older ones. Contemporary design which is compatible with existing structures in massing, materials and detailing is encouraged. In this manner, Powell will continue to experience the growth, change, and variety of architecture which has given the City much of its character and charm. 

The buildings at the corner of Olentangy and Liberty Streets should be commercial types in a scale similar to existing commercial buildings. Similar buildings, slightly smaller in scale, may also be appropriate on lots immediately adjacent to the corner lots. These buildings should also be built right up to the sidewalk line, as are the existing ones. Tall, commercial building Types are appropriate only at The corner of Olentangy and Liberty streets. 

In other areas of the Historic District, the massing of new construction should reflect that of existing stuctures, other than commercial types. Every effort should be made to break up the massing of these buildings through the use of wings, projections, porches, roof slopes and dormers. The typical building types which have been discussed provide a variety of massing types which can be used as guidelines. Most of these examples are made up of two or more masses. Even those which strive for the appearance of one block (Single Gables, American Four Squares, and Bungalows) have their masses reduced by roof slopes, porches, and dormers. Massive, Blocky Buildings And Long, Linear Buildings Are Not Appropriate Anywhere In The Historic District. 


Roofs 
Roofs play a significant visual role in the massing of Powell's historic buildings. Roofs can take many forms; the illustrations below show several common roof shapes found in late 19th century and early 20th century architecture. Most buildings in Powell have traditional gable roofs. Slopes or pitches range from a rise of 7 feet in a run of 12 feet (about 30 degrees) to a rise of 14 feet in a run of 12 feet (about 50 degrees). The average pitch is a rise of 11 feet in a run of 12 feet (about 42 degrees). 

Gable roof shapes occur in all types of buildings, especially Upright and Wings, Gabeled Ells, and Single Gables. A variation on this type, which occurs frequently in the City, could be called the "bungalow" roof. In this variation, the front plane of the roof is longer than the rear plane, and the pitches of these planes may be the same or slightly different. Several buildings in Powell have hipped roofs. This type occurs primarily on American Four Squares. A few buildings in Powell have flat or shed roofs. These occur primarily on taller, commercial structures. Gambrel roofs are traditionally used on agricultural buildings. 36 North Liberty street is one of the very few buildings in Powell with this roof shape. 

Most roofs in Powell are composed of one or two simple forms, such as intersecting gables forming an "L" or "T" shape. Some City roofs are a bit more elaborate, enlivened by dormers and gablets. Dormers occur most frequently on houses which do not have a full second story. They are used to light and ventilate the roof space, making it usable for living space. Gabled dormers occur primarily on Cottages, Single Gables, and some Bungalows. Hipped dormers often enliven the hipped roofs of American Four Squares. Shed dormers occur most frequently on Bungalows, although they are occasionally used on the upright of Upright and Wings. Most Upright and Wing, Gabeled Ell, and Commercial type buildings do not contain dormers of any type. 

Gablets are miniature gables which often top hipped roofs. They are sometimes used to add complexity to the roofs of Queen Anne style buildings. 
New Construction 
New Construction in the Historical District should use the roof forms and slopes typical to the City. These roof types should be used in an appropriate manner and location. This does not mean that a roof type may only be used on the building type to which it is associated. Examining the ways in which certain roof forms were used can help to determine their appropriate use. 
Gable roofs are most appropriate for new construction in the Historic District. Their breadth, length, and slope should be similar to those of existing gable roofs, as excessively wide, long or steeply pitched gables would not be appropriate. Bungalow roofs should be used only where a second story is being disguised, as their size would cause taller buildings to appear too massive. 
Hipped roofs are very useful where a sloped roof is needed, but a small roof desired. Cubical, two story buildings, such as American Four Squares, can benefit from such a roof. 

Flat roofs should be used only on commercial type buildings built at or near the corner of Olentangy and Liberty Streets (see Building Types - New Construction section). Shed roofs may be used for commercial buildings in the above location, for accessory buildings, and lean-to type projections. Gambrel roofs should be used with caution, as they belong primarily in the very rural areas outside the City limits. 
Roof forms can be used to break up the overall mass of a building. In order to be effective, they must look and function like roofs. For example, if the intention is to render an upper story like a roof, simply siding the straight, full height walls in a roofing material will not be effective. The "roof" must slope, preferably within the range of pitches typical to the City, and be detailed like a roof, with eaves, gutters, and, typical roofing material. Natural light can be admitted through the use of dormers and gable windows. 

Dormers can be used to break up the mass of a roof, or make an upper story habitable. They can not take the place of projections and wings necessary to break up the mass of the building itself. Dormers should be scaled appropriately to their type and use. Gabled and hipped dormers should appear as small, individual elements on a roof slope. Shed dormers on a bungalow roof may be somewhat wider, running most of the length of a roof ridge. Dormers which run the entire length of a roof ridge are rarely appropriate, as they add too much mass to a building. 
Additions 
Much of the architecture of Powell has a definite additive quality. Many buildings contain projections and wings, subordinate to the main building mass. In some cases, these "additions" were actually constructed at the same time as the main structure, but were detailed to look "added on". In other cases, a building has collected extra rooms, lean to's, enclosed porches, and perhaps even a second story over its lifetime. These changes aver time are important to the history of a building and can add great charm to an otherwise simple mass. 

Appropriate additions to existing buildings in the Historical District are encouraged. A close look at additions made in the past can yield clues to sympathetic design of contemporary additions. In general, additions to an existing building should be compatible with that building in massing, materials and level of detail. 
It is not necessary nor desirable that additions match the existing buildings exactly. Contemporary design is encouraged as long as it is in harmony with the character of the historic district. This will continue the tradition of growth and change in Powell, without completely altering the essential character of the City. 
The mass of any addition should be kept subordinate to the mass of the main portion of the building. This means that the addition should be smaller and shorter than the main portion of the building. The roofline of an addition should not appear as a continuation of the main form or roof, nor should it mimic, or "complete" existing forms or rooflines. 

If the proposed size of an addition threatens to compete with the main block of the building, breaking the required space into two or more smaller masses should be considered. Another alternative is to construct all or part of the required new space as a separate accessory building, following the guidelines for accessory buildings in the Site Considerations section. 
*Innapropriate Addition* 
Addition duplicates existing forms and rooflines exactly. Addition completes existing roof. Addition is very difficult to distinguish from original building. Symmetrical result is not in character with Powell. 
Architectural Elements 
Architectural and decorative elements refer to the details of a building. Windows, doors, porches, and ornamentation add character and flavor to buildings. They give life to a facade by introducing light and shadow. Details can also help to identify the period and style of an historic building. Most of the detailing on Powell's buildings is simple in nature, but there are several examples of more elaborate decoration. 
Even very simple detailing plays an important role in establishing the character of older buildings. Existing ornamentation within Powell's historic district should be retained and repaired whenever possible. It is especially important to protect and preserve examples of skilled craftsmanship in the Historic District. 
If a major portion of the detailing. On one of Powell's buildings is missing or beyond repair, there are two appropriate solutions. One option is to reproduce as exactly as possible the missing or deteriorated element. This method requires thorough research, especially if no physical evidence is available (such as a deteriorated, but recognizable element), Physical, photographic, or other type of reliable historic evidence should be used when reproducing missing elements. 
Another option is to design a simplified version of the missing or deteriorated element, which replicates the important visual characteristics of the original. These characteristics include composition, size, proportion, texture, and rhythm. This second option is often cheaper than exact reproduction, as it can use some standard, contemporary materials. Simplified replacement elements do require careful attention to detail, and design talent. In many cases, the services of an Architect will be necessary. 
When new construction is being contemplated in the Historic District, careful attention to details can help create architecture which is contemporary, but compatible with the historic character of the City. Exact replication of typical architectural and decorative elements in the City is not necessary or desirable. A more appropriate approach is to design new elements to reflect the important visual characteristics of typical Powell elements. 
Whether architectural and decorative elements are being repaired, replaced, or used in new construction, the effect of any one element on the whole composition of the building must be studied carefully. Although some elements, such as an elaborate porch, dominate visually, it is the effect of all the elements working together which truly defines the character of a building. 
Windows 
Windows are one of the most direct expressions of a building's character. Their proportions influence the overall proportions of the building, and their functional and decorative treatments are very important in the composition of a facade. 
Many of the buildings in Powell have had their windows replaced over time. As a result, a wide variety of window types and proportions exists today. Although replacement windows are a part of the history of a building, many of the changes which have been made in Powell have radically altered the proportions and character of the buildings. 
There are three basic types of windows which are historically correct within the Historic District, double-hung, "ribbon" and fixed sash. The most common type of window in the City is double-hung, straight-topped, and has tall, thin proportions. These windows range from two to three times as tall as they are wide. Two-over-two or one-over-one pane divisions are typical. 

A few exceptions to the standard type of double-hung window can be found in Powell. Most of Powell's brick buildings, such as the schoolhouse at 80 S. Liberty Street have segmental arched windows. In some early 20th century houses, the upper sashes of double-hung windows are leaded, in a pattern of four or five vertical divisions. 
Double-hung windows occur on all types of buildings in Powell. Generally, earlier types of buildings, such as Upright and Wings and Gabeled Ells, have taller and thinner windows in proportions approaching three times as high as their are wide. Later building types, such as Bungalows and American Four Squares have windows closer in proportion to twice as high as they are wide. First story windows are generally taller than second story windows in all types of buildings. 
A less common type of window in Powell is a ribbon of three or four windows which occurs primarily in the dormers of bungalows. True ribbon windows are separated only by their frames. In some cases, Powell's ribbon windows are actually separated by very thin pieces of wall. Since the overall effect is that of glass and frame only, they can be considered ribbon windows. These windows tend to have shorter proportions, ranging from one and two thirds to two times as tall as they are wide. 

The least common type of window in Powell is the fixed sash. Fixed sash windows occur in various shapes, ranging from fairly tall and thin to almost square. The most common type is a single large pane, one and a half to two times as high as it is wide. 
In some cases, fixed sash windows have an upper transom which is usually one third of the overall window height. Fixed sash windows are primarily used as an accent on a main facade. They frequently occur on the upright portion of an Upright and Wing or the front facing gable of a Gabeled Ell. 
A bay window is a combination of angled walls and windows which projects from a building, and rests on a foundation. Some of Powell's Italianate and Queen Anne buildings have such windows. Powell's bay windows are composed of typical double hung windows surrounded by a variety of detailing. 

Every attempt should be made to retain and repair existing wood double-hung windows. The double-hung system provides good ventilation by allowing the top and bottom of a window to be opened at the same time. In addition, wood windows provide better insulation than metal ones. 
The major problems with old windows are broken glass, inoperable sashes, and decayed wood. Broken panes can be removed, replaced and reset in fresh putty. Loose panes may simply need fresh putty. Inoperable sashes may be caused by a broken sash cord, multiple layers of paint or a frame which is no longer square. Sash cords can be replaced easily. There is usually an access panel at the bottom inside of the frame. A window which has been painted shut can be freed gently with a dull knife and a little paint remover. Even window frames which are no longer square; due to settlement or weather, can be repaired by squaring the frame in the rough opening. 
Deteriorated wood window parts can often be repaired by cutting out rotted portions and filling holes with putty, plastic wood, or a homemade paste of waterproof glue and sawdust. Severe deterioration or deterioration in structural members (lintels and sills) can sometimes be repaired with epoxy resins. A final coat of paint will protect repaired wood windows and restore their original appearance. 
Parts of a window should be replaced only if they are deteriorated beyond repair or are missing. Replacement parts should match the originals in material and appearance. 

Sometimes it is necessary to replace an entire window. Replacement windows should match the originals in material, size, number of panes and type of operation. In addition, rails, stiles, and mullions should match the originals in thickness and depth. 
Under no circumstances should a significant window opening be made smaller to accommodate a stock window. Such a treatment will ruin not only the proportions of the window itself, but those of the entire building. 

In addition to the window itself, the trim, sills, lintels, and hood molding which surround it adds to the character of a building. Window trim has aesthetic and practical purposes. First, the trim provides a visual transition from the sheathing material to the window. Window trim also protects the joint between the window and the wall from the elements. 
Original window treatments should be maintained as much as possible. Deteriorated trim can usually be repaired, by filling holes with putty, plastic wood, or epoxy, and painting. In many cases, sanding and new coat of paint is all that is needed. 
If window trim must be replaced, new trim should match the original in width and detailing as closely as possible. If replacement windows are installed, care must be taken to preserve and protect all original wood trim. If trim must be removed to install new windows, it should be treated with care until it is back in place. 
Blocking of existing windows Is not encouraged. Windows on major or highly visible facades should never be blocked. In some cases, it may be necessary to block a window on a secondary facade to accommodate changes in the interior arrangement of a building. This should be undertaken only after all other possible courses of action have been considered. 
If blocking an opening is the only practical solution, it should be done in such a manner that the original opening and all trim will be preserved. The infill should also be removable in the future without damage to the original opening. 
The preferred method of blocking an opening is to infill the opening with a stud wall, sheathing, and wood shutters. Another alternative is to infill the opening with a recessed panel of the exterior sheathing material. This panel should be recessed at least one inch, in order to maintain the original opening and trim. 
New Construction 
New construction within the historic district should use window types and proportions characteristic of Powell. Double-hung windows in tall, thin proportions are appropriate in almost all types of Powell buildings. 

In general, the proportions of windows should reflect the proportions of the building. Taller, thinner buildings with more articulated masses should have taller, thinner windows. Buildings which have the appearance of one single main mass can take shorter, squarer windows. 
Ribbon windows should be used on dormers or facades which are not highly visible, as they were not used extensively in the City, except in dormers. Larger fixed sash windows, with or without transoms, should be limited to one or two as accents on the main facade. 
Square windows are appropriate only in limited situations, such as dormers which require square windows. Windows which are wider than they are tall are not appropriate and should not be used in the historic district. 

"Colonial type" sashes divided into more than two panes (six-over-six, eight-over-eight, etc.) are characteristic of 18th century architecture. Using these smaller paned windows will create a false, "earlier" appearance which is not appropriate in Powell's Historic District. 

  

New construction should follow the proportions of window to wall found in typical Powell buildings. Buildings with more articulated masses should have less window and more wall. Single mass buildings should have more windows to enliven their facades. Typical window to wall proportions are illustrated below. 
If large expanses of glass are desired, they should be limited to one area of a facade which is not highly visible. They should be designed with vertical divisions which will create a module reminiscent of typical City window proportions. These larger sections of glass should be integrated with other fenestration. For example, an odd number of units might have the middle piece centered on an existing upper story window. 
Most of the windows in Powell are detailed with simple trim, and this simplicity should be reflected in new construction. It is not necessary for window surrounds in new construction to duplicate existing ones exactly. It is more important That the sense of a lintel, Frame and sill be conveyed. Window trim should be substantial enough to reflect the dimensions (width and thickness) of window treatments typically found in Powell. 

Aluminum Windows 
Wood windows are preferred for Replacement or new construction In the historic district. If aluminum windows must be used, they must resemble, as closely as possible, typical wood window dimensions used in Powell. All of the guidelines discussed under replacement windows and new construction apply for aluminum as well as wood windows. Aluminum windows should have a permanent finish in white bronze, black, or a color which matches painted wood trim. Avoid "natural", silver colored aluminum finishes. 

Combination wood and aluminum windows may be acceptable for replacement or new construction. These types of windows have wood rails, stiles, and mullions which are either clad or replicated in aluminum on the exterior. Often, the wood parts have dimensions similar to those found in traditional windows. Since the wood is either clad or matched on the exterior in metal, these windows can closely resemble traditional wood windows. The guidelines for both wood and aluminum windows apply to combination windows. 
Storm and Screen Windows 
Storm windows can help conserve energy in the winter and screen windows may be necessary for ventilation in the summer. Storm windows should be installed on the exterior of existing buildings to avoid condensation on original windows. In this location, they can also protect the historic windows from further weathering. 
Storm and screen windows are appropriate in the Historic District if they are as unobtrusive as possible. Storm windows should be the same size and proportion as the windows being protected. Any rails should coincide with rails on the main windows. Aluminum or wood storm windows are acceptable. All frames should be painted to match the main window frame color. 
Doors 
The front door of a building performs many functions. It announces the entry visually and is often the first element which visitors encounter at a close range. In older buildings, the importance of the front door was recognized by the care given to its design. 

Most buildings in Powell have a single front door, with simple trim which matches the window trim on the building. Typical doors are simple in design, with either four wood panels or a single glazed panel above a wood one. Glazed doors generally have modest moldings around the glass pane and either simple molding or carving in the solid panel below. An elaborate version of this door can be found at 15 North Liberty Street, and a simpler version appears on the Martin Perry house. 
Existing wood or glass paneled doors should be retained and repaired whenever possible. Many doors which appear badly deteriorated simply need to be sanded and painted. 
Paneled doors are constructed of slender wood or glass panels enclosed in a heavy structural frame. The panels are the weakest part of an old door, and usually the first part which requires repair. 
Wood panels generally stay intact, but if they have been damaged, they can be replaced with plywood, and the whole door repainted. Broken glass panels should be replaced with glass. 

Ornamentation, such as molding or carving, should be preserved. Missing or badly deteriorated pieces should be replicated as closely as possible. 
Original wood door frames lintels, and sills should be retained and repaired. Repair techniques for lintels, frames, and decorative molding will be similar to those outlined in the section on windows. 
Door sills are one of the first parts of a door frame which will show wear. Deteriorated wood sills can be repaired in two ways. The rotted portions can be scraped out and filled with an epoxy stabilizer. In many cases, it will be easier to simply pry up the old sill and replace it with a new sill. The new sill should be made out of wood in the same thickness as the original. If the old sill can be removed in one piece, it can be used' as a pattern. Otherwise, careful measurements of the original should be taken before removal. 
New Construction 
Doors used in new construction within the Historic District should be similar to those typically found in Powell. These doors should be simple in design, and generally vertical in proportion. Three or Four paneled wood doors or doors with a glazed upper panel are appropriate. Doors with more than four wood panels or several small panes of glass are generally too elaborate for the simple buildings typical of Powell. Modern flush doors are too simple and are not appropriate in the Historic District. 

All exterior doors in the Historic District should be painted to match or coordinate with building trim. Color guidelines are given in the section on painting. 
Door trim used in new construction should reflect the traditional trims, which are similar to those illustrated for windows. These trims need not be exact duplicates of existing Powell door treatments. It is more important that the scale and substance of the trim be similar to that of traditional door surrounds. The expression of lintel, frame, and sill should be inherent in contemporary door treatments. 
Steel Doors 
Although wood doors are preferred, steel doors may be appropriate for replacement or new construction. Wood doors provide better insulation, especially when fitted with weather stripping, but metal doors may desired for security or maintenance reasons. Steel doors used for replacement or new construction within the Historic District should have some type of paneled or paneled and glazed design which reflects traditional City doors. Steel doors should be painted to match other trim according to the paint color guidelines. 

Storm and Screen Doors 
Storm doors can be very useful in saving energy, and screen doors may be necessary for ventilation. In some of Powell's older homes which do not have air conditioning. These doors may be appropriate in the historic district , but they must be as unobtrusive as possible. This means that wood or metal storm doors should match the doors which they are protecting. Storm or screen door frames should coincide with framed areas on the main door. Areas of screen or glass should coincide with appropriate paneled or glazed areas on the door which they are protecting. Any solid portions of screen doors should be detailed to match the corresponding area of the main door. The screen or storm door should be painted the same color as the main door. 
Porches 
Almost every building in Powell has a porch. In many cases, the porch is the focal point of the facade, being the one element which exhibits any type of stylistic detailing. Powell's porches come in a variety of sizes, ranging from small, barely covering a door, to wrapping three sides of a house. 

Porches in Powell fall into two basic categories. Simple porches have round or square columns and simple railings or no railings. More elaborate porches have Eastlake Italianate, or Queen Anne detailing, with curved brackets, turned posts, carved areas, and patterned shingles. 
Most of Powell's original porches were constructed of wood. Their bases were either framed up in wood or constructed out of the foundation material used for the main portion of the building. Wood porches generally had a wood floor and a wood base molding. A very few porches in Powell have columns built out of rock face cast concrete block. Porch stairs were originally built out of wood or limestone, but most of these have been replaced with concrete stairs. 
Every effort should be made to repair and retain existing wood porches in the Historic District. Repair techniques similar to those outlined for wood window trims can be used on porch detailing. If pieces of the porch are missing or deteriorated beyond repair, they should be replaced. Replacements should match the originals as closely as possible in material, scale, and detailing. 
Under no circumstances should a porch in the historic district be removed and not replaced in kind. If an entire porch has deteriorated beyond repair, it should be replaced with one which matches it in material, scale and detailing. 

If it is impossible to match the porch exactly, it may be appropriate to construct a reasonable reproduction out of stock lumber. In this case the size, scale, and overall form of the original elements should be replicated. 
Columns and entablatures should appear similar in strength to the original. Pediments should have the same pitch and should rest on an entablature of the same thickness as the original. These should also be faced with a similar material, such as patterned shingles. Railings should reflect the open or solidness of the original. Balusters should have the same form and spacing as the originals . 
Moldings should reflect the replaced ones in scale and thickness, although they need not be as elaborate. Bases and steps should be reconstructed out of wood, or wood over masonry, as the originals were. Special attention should be given to details such as base moldings and stair nosings. 
The closing in of existing porches is not encouraged. 
New Construction 
All new buildings constructed within the historic district should have some type of porch element. These porches should reflect the types and styles of porches which exist in Powell. Once again, exact duplication is not desirable. New or reconstructed porches should reflect the size, scale and level of detail of the buildings to which they are attached. 
In general, buildings which exhibit vertical proportions and articulated massing, such as Gabled Ells, Upright and Wings, and buildings with irregular massing should have porches with vertical proportions. Columns should be taller and thinner, and railings, if used, should be open and delicate in scale. 

Buildings which tend to be more of a single mass such as American Four Squares, Single Gables, Bungalows or similar structures, should have heavier, more substantial porches. Columns should have thick and stocky proportions. Railings should be solid or made up of wider balusters, closely spaced. 
Buildings with simple detailing and little or no stylistic ornamentation should have modest porches, with plain round or square columns. These simple porches may have a very simple railing or none at all. 
Buildings which have more elaborate, stylistic ornamentation should have more elaborate porches. New construction with Italiante, Eastlake, or Queen Anne type detailing or new buildings which are enlivened by a variety of patterned shingles will require porches with similar ornamentation. These porches can have turned posts, curved brackets, patterned shingles, elaborate railings and carved details. 

New buildings which reflect some of the later styles, such as Stick Style and Bungalow should have porches with geometric detailing. Simple, square posts and railings which are solid or made up of square balusters would be appropriate on these types of houses. 

Another alternative is to contrast an elaborate porch against a building with simple massing or detailing. Care must be taken to balance the level of detail in the porch and house so that one does not overwhelm the other and the building and porch appear to belong together. 
15 North Liberty Street is a successful example of contrasting a highly detailed porch against a simple mass. An elaborate Eastlake porch wraps a single gable building. 
Newly constructed or reconstructed porches in the Historic District should be built primarily of wood. Porch bases may be constructed of wood or the foundation material used in the rest of the building. The porch floor should be wood, and should rest visually on a wood base molding stairs should be built out of wood. 
In general, masonry (brick, stone, block, or concrete) porches are not appropriate in the historic district. Wrought iron columns and railings (or aluminum replicas) are inappropriate for replacement or new construction. Overly rustic wood porches, with rough, split or log posts, and railings which resemble fences should be avoided in the Historic District. 
Cornices and Friezes 
Cornice refers to the projecting piece of trim which terminates the upper part of a wall. The frieze is the trim on the upper portion of a wall which supports the cornice. In many cases, the term "cornice" is used to refer to the entire composition of cornice and frieze. This trim serves a practical purpose as well as providing an opportunity for stylistic embellishment. The cornice and frieze seal off the critical junction of the roof and wall structures, and help support the roof overhang. 

Elaborate cornices occur primarily on Powell's Italianate, Eastlake and commercial buildings. Sometimes these elements occur on a portion of a building, such as a bay window or porch. In general, Italianate friezes consist of curved brackets, separated by paneled areas. In some cases, the frieze is a simple, flat molding, such as a dentil molding. 
Existing cornices and friezes should be preserved. If parts are deteriorated, they should be repaired by cutting out rotted parts and filling cracks with putty or epoxy. If elements are beyond repair or missing they should be replaced in kind. Cornices can often be duplicated using stock moldings. Brackets can be duplicated using thick boards and a jig saw. If the brackets are quite elaborate, it may be easier to make a mold of an existing one, which can be duplicated in plastic or sheet metal. 
Under no circumstances should an entire cornice and frieze be removed if it is in repairable condition. If these elements are beyond repair, they should be replaced with trim which resembles the original. Since exact duplication of a very detailed frieze is difficult, it is appropriate to imitate the size, bulk, and rhythm of the original, with simplified detail. 
New Construction 
Cornices and friezes will be optional decorative elements in most new construction. The exception is on taller, commercial scale buildings constructed near the intersection of Olentangy and Liberty Streets. The larger scale of these buildings will require a terminating feature at the roofline. 
Cornices used in new construction need not be exact duplicates of those existing in Powell. A simplified version which reflects the scale, substance and rhythm of typical City cornices will be appropriate. 

As with all decorative elements, cornices should match the scale and level of detail of the other elements of a building. Cornices used on commercial scale buildings should be fairly large (about one eighth to one sixth of the total height of the building) and should extend along all facades visible from main roads. cornices used on smaller scale buildings should be smaller in scale and less elaborate in detail. 
Gutters and Downspouts 
Most of the buildings in Powell's Historic District have simple, unobtrusive hung gutters. Hung gutters are steel troughs hung from the eaves of the roof. The primary visual contribution of this type of gutter is another shadow or "cornice" line at the edge of a roof. 
Roof gutters in Powell serve an important practical purpose. They protect the roof, walls and structure of a building by ensuring proper drainage of water from the roof. Existing gutters should be inspected periodically and cleared of debris as necessary. 

Original gutters in good condition should be retained and repaired as necessary. Deteriorated gutters may be replaced with aluminum gutters which approximate the size and profile of the original gutters. 
Aluminum gutters are appropriate for new construction as long as they have a visual impact similar to typical hung gutters. All gutters used in replacement or new construction should be painted to match fascia trim. Color suggestions for trim can be found in the section on Painting and Colors. 
Downspouts also serve an important practical purpose, but they are generally more visually obtrusive than roof gutters. Downspouts direct water away from the walls of a building, and protect the sheathing materials from water damage. Downspouts should also direct water away from the foundation by either directing it down sloped ground or into a splashblock. 
Original downspouts should be retained and repaired, especially if they are an integral part of the design of the building. Periodic inspection and clearing out of debris will insure that downspouts continue to perform their vital drainage function. 

Deteriorated downspouts should be replaced in order to insure proper roof drainage. If the downspouts are an important visual element in the design of the building, they should be replaced with similar downspouts in the original locations. 
Downspouts designed for replacement or new construction should 
Painting and Colors 
A good coat of paint is a building's best defense against the elements. Paint protects wood siding and trim from deterioration by shedding moisture. The exterior of a building will need a new coat of paint about every five to eight years. This routine maintenance job is especially important to protect historic materials. 
Cracks, blistering, peeling or exposed bare wood are signs of paint failure. In many cases, this is due to normal weathering. Sometimes, moisture problems, such as improper roof drainage, cause paint failure. These problems should be solved before repainting, or the new coat will fail almost immediately. Other causes of paint failure could be mistakes in application of previous coats, inadequate surface preparation, or incompatibility between the paint and the surface being painted. In these cases, the improperly applied coats will have to be removed, and the exposed surface prepared for a new coat. 
Most of the existing buildings in Powell have several layers of paint. Removing all of these layers is not necessary or desirable. Paint should be removed only to the next sound layer using the gentlest effective means. If an existing layer appears to be adhering well to previous coats, then it can be considered a layer, and new paint adhere to it well. When repainting an existing building, it is appropriate to use original colors. Original colors can sometimes be determined by doing paint scrapings or analysis. Although scraping can be done by amateurs, it is recommended that an expert be consulted. Colors may have changed due to chemical makeup of paint and weathering. It may be difficult to determine the exact sequence of paint, unless one has experience in paint analysis. If the original colors can not be determined, or are not desirable, the color guidelines which follow should be used to create a suitable color scheme. 
Paint color is an important visual choice. The color guidelines which follow apply for existing buildings or new construction within the Historic District. In general, colors used in the Historic District should be muted, dark, and earth-toned. Livelier colors should be limited to trim, or one accent piece, such as a door. Avoid extremely bright, pure colors, or using two colors of the same intensity. DO NOT USE HIGH GLOSS PAINT. Semi-gloss may be acceptable for high maintenance areas, such as porch floors, stairs, and doors. 
Relatively simple color schemes were the most popular during the 19th and early 20th centuries, and are the most appropriate for use in the Historic District. The simpler the building, the fever colors should be used. Since Powell architecture is relatively simple, color schemes should be kept to two or three colors. More elaborate buildings, with recognizable styles, such as Italianate, Queen Anne, and Eastlake, may be enlivened by the use of a variety of tints and shades of basic colors. A building can be divided into five basic parts for colors: the base; the body; the trim; doors, windows, and stairs; and the roof. The base, usually the foundation, will have the color inherent in the material out of which it is constructed. The body, or background color should be compatible with the foundation material, especially if the foundation has strong inherent color, such as the reds and purples of glazed block. 

The trim includes corner boards, cornices, water tables, door and window trims, and porches. Windows, doors, and stairs provide other opportunities for color. 
The moving parts of a window (sash) should be painted white, black, or another dark color. Contrasting window trim against a lighter or darker sash will retain the visual integrity of the window and its trim. 
Doors can be an excellent opportunity for a splash of brighter color, however, this color should be carefully coordinated with the rest of the color scheme. Porch floors and stairs should be painted with heavy duty paint in a neutral gray or dark brown. 
The fifth part of a color composition is the roof. In Powell, most roofs should be some shade of gray slate, asphalt or "tin". These colors will blend well with almost any paint scheme. 
A successful color scheme will unify the five basic parts of a building into a single composition, without denying emphasis to distinctive features. 
The color suggestions which follow are intended as guidelines for existing buildings and new construction. The type and style designations are based on existing buildings. New construction should follow the color groups for the building type and style closest to its form and stylistic detailing. New or existing buildings which combine more than one type and style, may be painted with colors from both groups. In general, body color should relate to the basic form of the building, and trim color to its stylistic embellishment. Careful attention must be paid to the overall effect of any paint scheme on the building itself and adjacent buildings. 
Color Schemes 
(Contact Development Department for approved color samples) 
  
Group 1 - Cottages 
A palette of delicate natural colors. 
(Sand, Straw, Earth, and Clay) 

  
Group 2 - Italianate, Gabled Ell, Upright and Wing 
A palette of generally darker colors with a few of the earlier, lighter colors persisting. More vivid contrast, and "picking out" of details is prevalent. 

Group 3 - Queen Anne, Eastlake, Stick, Single Gable 
A palette of darker colors, used as body colors to emphasize architectural mass, 1995 Replacement which were previously used as trim Olives, oranges, and reds used to materials, volumes, and structure. 

  
Group 4 - Bungalow, American Four Square, (later) Single Gable 
A palette of slightly lighter, less aggressive colors on structure and materials continues. 

Glossary 
    ARTICULATED (MASSES): Masses which are distinct, and highly differentiated. A building composed of several distinct and readily identifiable masses. 
    ASYMMETRICAL: Not symmetrical, but perhaps achieving a balance of dissimilar forms, masses or elements on either side of a center line. 
    BALUSTER: A miniature column or other form of upright, which, in series, supports a handrail. 
    BAY: the portion of a building between two adjacent structural elements. Eg. a portion of a wall, containing windows, between two sections of solid wall which contain structure. 
    BAY WINDOW: A window which projects angularly from another wall and from the ground up. 
    BRACKET: A small supporting piece, often carved or molded, which carries a projecting weight. 
    BOND: The pattern created by the method of laying masonry units. In brickwork, bonds are created by alternating headers, bricks laid so that the short end appears on the face of the wall, and stretchers, bricks laid so that the long side appears on the face of the wall, in a regular pattern. 
    CORNICE: The projecting, ornamental molding at the top of a wall or building. 
    DENTIL, DENTIL MOULDING: Small square blocks used in a series, to form a molding pattern which resembles a set of very even teeth, hence the name. 
    DORMER, DORMER WINDOW: A window placed vertically in a sloping roof, and with a roof of its own. 
    DOUBLE-HUNG WINDOW: A window which has two balanced sashes, one sliding vertically over the other. 
    EAVE: The portion of a sloping roof which overhangs a wall. 
    EFFLORESCENCE: A white, powdery deposit of saline particles on the outside face of a masonry wall, resulting from the presence of salts in the clay or mortar. 
    FACADE: The outside face of a building. 
    FENESTRATION: The disposition of windows in a facade. 
    FIXED SASH WINDOW: A piece of glass in a frame which is permanently fixed in a wall. 
    FRIEZE: The trim on the upper portion of a wall which supports the cornice. 
    GLAZED: Fitted with glass, as in a door or building. 
    GLAZING: glass set or to be set in frames. 
    GLAZED BLOCK: A type of hollow clay tile manufactured in Appalachia, out of native clay. Produced from the 1870's to the 1930's, these blocks were fired with a salt glaze which made them durable and waterproof. 
    HISTORICAL (HIGH) STYLE ARCHITECTURE: Structures designed and built according to the dictates of a specific, readily identifiable, national or international architectural style. Show strong influence of contemporary architectural trends. 
    GABLE: The triangular, upper part of a wall at the end of a pitched roof. The term can also refer to the gabeled end or wing of a building. 
    HOOD MOLDING: Projecting molding over a window or door. 
    LEAN-TO: A subordinate building, the ridge of its single-slope roof supported by the major structure. 
    MASS: The three dimensional (length, width, and height) property of a solid object. 
    MASSING: Overall form and shape of a structure composed of simple masses. 
    ORIEL WINDOWS: A projecting window, supported by corbels or brackets. Unlike Bay Windows, oriels do not reach the ground. 
    RESPIRATOR: A mask of cloth worn over the mouth and nose to prevent inhalation of harmful substances. 
    RISING DAMP: Ground water rising in masonry walls by capillary action. Caused by improper drainage, a high water table or lack of waterproofing in the foundation. 
    SANDBLASTING: A masonry cleaning method in which sand is forced against the masonry under extremely high pressure. Sandblasting removes the outer, protective layer of the masonry, and much of the mortar along with dirt. DO NOT SANDBLAST MASONRY WALLS. THEY WILL BE RUINED FOREVER. 
    SAND MOLD RED BRICKS: Bricks which are molded, instead of extruded. Sand, which lines the wooden molds to facilitate removal, gives the bricks a soft texture. 
    SASH: A frame designed to hold window glass. The moving part of a window, glass and frame. 
    SASH CORD: A small piece of rope attaching one side of a window sash to its counterweight. 
    SEGMENTAL ARCH: A round arch whose top is flatter than a semicircle, but not completely flat. 
    SPALLING: Splitting off of small fragments of a masonry unit from its surface. 
    SPLASHBLOCK: A concrete pan which collects water from a downspout and drains it away from the foundation. 
    STORY: The space in a building between successive floor levels. 
    SYMMETRICAL: Having identical forms, masses or elements on either side of a center line. 
    TOOLING: Decorative profiles given to mortar joints, before the mortar is completely dry. These are usually produced with special tools. 
    TRANSOM: An opening over a door or window, and containing a hinged or pivoted, glazed or solid sash, usually for ventilation. 
    VERNACULAR ARCHITECTURE: Buildings constructed at a modest level of stylistic embellishment according to prevailing architectural modes and common building types. (Popular Architecture) 
    WATER TABLE: A base course projecting above a foundation to direct water away from it. 
    WEATHER STRIPPING: A strip or interlocking strips of material that help block the passage of air around a door, window or other opening. 
    WING: Secondary mass of a building. 
PART THIRTEEN - BUILDING CODE 
TITLE ONE - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1305 - FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Basis of zoning districts, O.R.C.  713.10; Levees, O.R.C.  717.01; Marking flood areas, O.R.C.  1521.14; Conservancy districts, purpose, O.R.C.  6101.04 

1305.01 - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES. 
(a)  Statutory Authorization City of Powell. Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Powell, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of Fact. The City of Powell has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted. 
(c)  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; 
(9)  Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood prone areas; 
(10)  Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the floodplain are maintained; 
(11)  Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values of the floodplain; 
(12)  Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and 
(13)  Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(d)  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means a structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
    Appeal means a written request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Areas of special flood hazard are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. 
    Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 100-year flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its flood subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Enclosure below the lowest floor See "Lowest Floor." 
    Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management) means the order issued by President Carter in 1977, which requires no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard. 
    Flood Insurance Risk Zones means the zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone definitions: 
(1)  Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined. 
(2)  Zones A1-30 and Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined. 
(3)  Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are determined. 
(4)  Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined. 
(5)  Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined. 
(6)  Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood. 
(7)  Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) is the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator. 
    Floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed. 
    Historic structure is any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or 
(3)  Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office. 
(4)  Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained by the City of Powell's historic preservation program, which program is certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis is an analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC) is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs are broken down into the following categories: 
(1)  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area. 
(3)  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." For the purposes of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
    Manufactured home park, as specified in the Ohio Administrative Code 3701-27-01, means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a federal program enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas, the Federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Powell Flood Insurance Rate Map, March 4, 1985, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in the O.R.C.  111.15 as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution, state college or university, community college district, technical college district, or state community college. "Agency" does not include the general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or any court. 
    Recreational vehicle is a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis, 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Registered professional architect is a person registered to engage in the practice of architecture under the provisions of sections 4703.01 to 4703.19 of the Revised Code. 
    Registered professional engineer is a person registered as a professional engineer under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code. 
    Registered professional surveyor is a person registered as a professional surveyor under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code. 
    Special flood hazard area also known as "Areas of Special Flood Hazard," is the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1 30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated with a watercourse. 
    Start of construction is the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building. 
    Structure is a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Substantial damage is damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement is any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any improvement to a structure that is considered "new construction," 
(2)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(3)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the standards of these regulations consistent with the variance conditions herein. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.03 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Lands to Which This Regulation Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Municipality as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development referenced in subsection (b) hereof, including any areas of special flood hazard annexed by the City. 
(b)  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal Emergency management Agency or the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Delaware County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas, effective April 16, 2009." This study, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Delaware County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas, dated April 16, 2009, and any revisions thereto adopted by reference and declared to be part of this regulation. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City of Powell, 47 Hall Street, Powell, Ohio 43065. In addition, any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authorized by a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved by the City of Powell as required by Section 1305.06(a)(3) Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments. 
(c)  Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authorized by a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved by the City of Powell as required by Section 1305.06(a)(3) Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments. 
(d)  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances (resolutions) including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance (resolution), the more restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations. 
(e)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over these regulations. 
(f)  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the City of Powell, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(g)  Severability. Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.04 - ADMINISTRATION. 
(a)  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Development of the City of Powell is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. 
(b)  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard areas. 
(2)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood protection elevation information. 
(3)  Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance. 
(4)  Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of these regulations have been committed. 
(5)  Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations. 
(6)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
(7)  Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during variance hearings. 
(8)  Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up. 
(9)  Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations. 
(c)  Floodplain Development Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other development activity including but not limited to filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in Section 1305.03(b) until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the requirements of these regulations have been met. 
(d)  Application Required. An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area as established in Section 1305.03(b). Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Application for a development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator. Where it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's location. Applications shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Site plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
(2)  Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are proposed. 
(3)  Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
(4)  Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement of these regulations. 
(5)  Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a floodplain development permit when applicable: 
A.  Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed structure as required in Section 1305.06(a)(4) and (5). 
B.  Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure not meeting the design requirements of Section 1305.06(a)(4)(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces. 
C.  Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and maintenance assurances as required in Section 1305.06(a)(8). 
D.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood elevations but no floodway as required by Section 1305.06(c). 
E.  A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by Section 1305.06(a)(8). 
F.  Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-scale developments as required by Section 1305.06(a)(3). 
G.  The application for a development permit shall be accompanied with the plan filing and review fee equal to that which is established by the Municipality for a development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.05 - REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION. 
(a)  Review. 
(1)  After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application shall be reviewed until all information required in Section 1305.04(d) has been received by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. 
(b)  Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion. 
(c)  Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions. 
(d)  Post-Construction Certifications Required. The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been issued: 
(1)  For new or substantially improved residential structures, or nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative. 
(2)  For all development activities subject to the standards of Section 1305.05(g)(1), a Letter of Map Revision. 
(e)  Revoking a Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 1305.07 of these regulations. 
(f)  Exemption from Filing a Development Permit. An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be required for: 
(1)  Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than $5,000.00. 
(2)  Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code Section 3701. 
(3)  Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board under O.R.C.  4906. 
(4)  Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous Waste Siting Board under O.R.C.  3734. 
(5)  Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988-Floodplain Management. 
Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations. 
(g)  Map Maintenance Activities. To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the City of Powell flood maps, studies and other data identified in Section 1305.03(b) accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities are identified: 
(1)  Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
A.  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include: 
1.  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
2.  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
3.  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
4.  Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Section 1305.06(a)(3). 
B.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with Section 1305.05(g)(1), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
C.  The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
1.  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
2.  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
D.  Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to Section 1305.05(g)(1)A. 
(2)  Right to Submit New Technical Data. The Floodplain Administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the City Manager of the City of Powell, and may be submitted at any time. 
(3)  Annexation/Detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the City of Powell have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the City of Powell's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the City suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the City has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority. 
(h)  Data Use and Flood Map Interpretation. The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard: 
(1)  In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source. 
(2)  Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance Study have been provided by FEMA: 
A.  Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base flood elevations and /or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(4)  The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 1305.07. 
(5)  Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water marks, etc.) shall prevail. 
(i)  Substantial Damage Determinations. Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1)  Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures located in special flood hazard areas; and 
(3)  Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.06 - USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION. 
(a)  The following use and development standards apply to development wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as established in Section 1305.03(b) or 1305.05(h)(1). 
(1)  Use Regulations. 
A.  Permitted Uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by City of Powell are allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. 
1.  Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, permitted under O.R.C.  3701. 
2.  Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard areas, permitted under O.R.C.  3734. 
(2)  Water and Wastewater Systems. The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code: 
A.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
B.  New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
C.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them during flooding. 
(3)  Subdivisions and Large Developments. 
A.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations; 
B.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
D.  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
E.  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in Section 1305.05(g)(1)A.4. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by Section 1305.06(a)(3)C. 
(4)  Residential Structures. 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring in this section and construction materials resistant to flood damage in Section 1305.06(a)(4)B. are satisfied. 
B.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
C.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
D.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood protection data are not available the structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade. 
E.  New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following standards: 
1.  Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage; and 
2.  Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or 
3.  Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
F.  Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
G.  Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt from the development standards of Section 1305.06(a)(4). 
H.  In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
(5)  Nonresidential Structures. 
A.  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of Section 1305.06(a)(4)A-C. and E-H. 
B.  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet all of the following standards: 
1.  Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood protection elevation; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and, 
3.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with Section 1305.06(a)(5)B.1, 2. 
C.  Where flood protection data are not available the structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent natural grade. 
(6)  Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards: 
A.  They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for more than 180 days, or 
B.  They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
C.  They must meet all standards of Section 1305.06(a)(4). 
(7)  Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks. All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
(8)  Assurance of Flood Carrying Capacity. Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized: 
A.  Development in Floodways. 
1.  In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant: 
a.  Meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section 1305.05(g)(1). 
b.  An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; 
c.  Certification that no structures are located in areas that would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation; 
d.  Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the proposed action on their property; and 
e.  Concurrence of the City Manager of City of Powell and the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions. 
B.  Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but no Floodways. 
1.  In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that this standard has been met; or, 
2.  Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant: 
a.  An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; 
b.  Section 1305.06(a)(8)A.2. 
C.  Alterations of a Watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the "bankfull stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following standards apply: 
1.  The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. 
2.  Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
3.  The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with City of Powell specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit. 
4.  The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section 1305.05(g)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.07 - APPEALS AND VARIANCES. 
(a)  Appeals. The City of Powell Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby appointed to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these regulations. Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals provided that such person shall file, within 20 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator, along with the appropriate filing fees as determined by City Council. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted. 
(b)  Variance Procedure. 
(1)  Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission, as established by the Municipality shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
A.  The decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant at the address stated in the application by ordinary mail. Those aggrieved by the decision, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision by filing the appeal within ten days of the date of the foregoing notice to the Delaware County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 2506. 
B.  Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In passing upon such application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider, and make findings of facts on, all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
6.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11.  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
C.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (b)(1)B.1-11. and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
D.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(2)  Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in subsection (e)(1)D. have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in the flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in this regulation, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (e)(1) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
4.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(c)  Appeal to the Court. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to the Delaware Court of Common Pleas, as provided in O.R.C. Ch. 2506. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
1305.08 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Compliance Required. 
(1)  No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in Section 1305.05(f). 
(2)  Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with subsection (c). 
(3)  Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in accordance with subsection (c). 
(b)  Notice of Violation. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall: 
(1)  Be put in writing on an appropriate form; 
(2)  Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations; 
(3)  Specify a reasonable time for performance; 
(4)  Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal; 
(5)  Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected. 
(c)  Violations and Penalties. Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a minor misdemeanor. Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be accessed a fee or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The City shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, 4-7-2009) 
CHAPTER 1309 - FENCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Current Municipal regulations concerning fences are located in the Zoning Code. 
Cross reference- Barbed wire fences prohibited,  521.07 

TITLE THREE - TECHNICAL CODES 
CHAPTER 1311 - OHIO BUILDING CODE[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed and reenacted Chapter 1311,  1311.01-1311.11, and 1311.99 to read as herein setout. Former Chapter 1311 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original Code.  See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Removal of unsafe structures, O.R.C.  715.26(B), 715.261; Power to enact further and additional regulations, O.R.C.  3781.01; Authorization by Board of Building Standards, O.R.C.  3781.12; Enforcement, O.R.C.  3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19; Final jurisdiction, O.R.C.  3781.04; Application, O.R.C.  3781.06, 3781.10(E), 3781.11(A); Submission of plans, O.R.C.  3791.04; Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings, O.R.C.  3781.103; Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, O.R.C.  3781.104; Automatic sprinkler systems, O.R.C.  3781.105, 3791.041 et seq.; Fire suppression systems, O.R.C.  3781.108; Use of public buildings by handicapped persons, OR.C.  3781.111; Abandoned service stations, O.R.C.  3791.11 et seq.; Safety standards for refuse containers, O.R.C.  3791.21 

1311.01 - ADOPTION. 
    Pursuant to O.R.C.  731.231, there is hereby adopted by the Municipality, the Ohio Building Code (OBC) and related codes as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Ohio Department of Commerce as published in Division 4101:1 et seq. of the Ohio Administrative Code (OAC), and as the same may be amended, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. Such Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. One copy of such Code has been and is now filed in the office of the Clerk of Council, with copies available for distribution to the public at cost. A copy is also available on file in the county law library. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1311.02 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the Ohio Building Code is to establish uniform minimum requirements for the erection, construction, repair, alteration, and maintenance of buildings, including construction of industrialized units. Such requirements shall relate to the energy conservation, safety, and sanitation of buildings for their intended use and occupancy with consideration for the following: 
(a)  Performance. Establish such requirements, in terms of performance objectives for the use intended. 
(b)  Extent of Use. Permit to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and technical methods, devices, and improvements which tend to reduce the cost of construction without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety, and security of the occupants of buildings without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or methods of construction. 
(c)  Standardization. To encourage, so far as may be practicable, the standardization of construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including methods employed to produce industrialized units. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1311.03. - RESERVED. 
1311.04 - COMPLIANCE. 
(a)  No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip any building or structure to which the Ohio Building Code is applicable, or make any addition thereto or alteration thereof, except in case of repairs for maintenance without affecting the construction, sanitation, safety or other vital feature of such building or structure, without complying with this chapter, O.R.C. Chs. 3781 and 3791 or the Ohio Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3791.01, 3791.02) 
(b)  No architect, builder, engineer, construction tradesmen, contractor, subcontractor, foreman or employee shall violate or assist in violating this chapter, O.R.C. Chs. 3781 and 3791 or the Ohio Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3791.01, 3791.03) 
(c)  No owner shall proceed with the construction, erection, alteration or equipment of any building to which the Ohio Building Code is applicable until the plans or drawings, specifications, and data have been approved as O.R.C.  3791.04 requires, or the industrialized unit inspected at the point of origin. No plans or specifications shall be approved or inspection approval given unless the building represented would, if constructed, repaired, erected, or equipped comply with Chapters 3781 and 3791 of the Ohio Revised Code and any rule made under those chapters. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
State Law reference- (O.R.C. 3791.04) 
1311.05 - EXISTING STRUCTURES. 
    The provisions of Chapter 34 of the Ohio Building Code shall control the alteration, repair, addition and change of occupancy of any existing structure. 
    The occupancy of any structure currently existing on the date of adoption of this Code shall be permitted to continue without change provided there are no orders of the Building Official pending, no evidence of fraud, or no serious safety or sanitation hazard. 
    Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been approved prior to the effective date of this Code are existing buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1311.07, 1311.08. - RESERVED. 
1311.08 - CONFLICT. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Ohio Building Code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Other Laws. The provisions of the Ohio Building Code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of state or federal law. The Municipality may make further and additional regulations, not in conflict with O.R.C. Chs. 3781 and 3791 or with the rules of the Board of Building Standards. However approval by the Board of Building Standards of any fixture, device, material, system, assembly or product of a manufacturing process, or method or manner of construction or installation shall constitute approval for their use anywhere in Ohio. 
(c)  Other Rules. As provided in division (B) of O.R.C.  3781.11, the rules of the Board of Building Standards shall supersede and govern any order, standard or rule of the Divisions of State Fire Marshal or Industrial Compliance in the Department of Commerce, and the Department of Health and of counties and townships, in all cases where such orders, standards or rules are in conflict with the rules of the Board of Building Standards, except that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to O.R.C. Ch. 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict. 
The rules of the Board of Building Standards adopted pursuant to O.R.C.  3781.10 shall govern any rule or standard adopted by the Board pursuant to O.R.C.  4104.02 and 4105.011. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1311.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1315 - RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed and reenacted Chapter 1315,  1315.01 to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 1315 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-34, adopted June 19, 2001. 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, O.R.C.  731.231 

1315.01 - ADOPTION. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.R.C.  731.231, there is hereby adopted by the Municipality, the Residential Code of Ohio (RCO) and related codes as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Ohio Department of Commerce as published in Division 4101:8 et seq. of the Ohio Administrative Code (OAC), and as the same may be amended, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. Such Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. One copy of such Code has been and is now filed in the office of the Clerk of Council, with copies available for distribution to the public at cost. A copy is also available on file in the county law library. 
(b)  The municipality hereby adopts Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs of the ICC International Residential Code/2009. 
(c)  The municipality hereby adopts Appendix F Radon Control Methods of the ICC International Residential Code/2009. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-24 ,  1, 6-19-18) 
CHAPTER 1323 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

1323.01 - PURPOSES. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of Powell by preventing property deterioration and by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and conditions of all residential and non-residential premises; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and non-residential premises; to fix penalties for violations of this chapter; and to provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is intended that this chapter be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated above. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  Accessory structure means a detached building or structure in a secondary or subordinate capacity from the main building. 
(b)  Building means a combination of materials enclosed within walls or exterior walls, built, erected and framed of component structured parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, business, institutions, animals, or property of any kind. 
(c)  Building Code means the Building Code as adopted by the Council of the City of Powell. 
(d)  Deterioration means the condition or appearance of a building or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, or lack of maintenance. 
(e)  Dwelling means any structure designed for use by human occupants for sleeping and living purposes, whether occupied or vacant. 
(f)  Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a building forming a single habitable unit. 
(g)  Exposed to public view means any premises, or any part thereof, or any building or any part, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, open-air parking lot, or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
(h)  Exterior of the premises means those portions of a building which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building erected thereon. 
(i)  Fire hazard means anything or act which increases or may cause any increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire, or that which may obstruct, delay, or hinder or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay, or hindrance or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay, hazard, or hindrance to the prevention, suppression, or extinguishment of fire. 
(j)  Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
(k)  Immediate neighborhood means an area separated by no appreciable space and specially denoting a limited number of properties in a very close space relationship to each other. 
(l)  Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard. 
(m)  Mixed occupancy means any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling uses. 
(n)  Natural growth means dead trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(o)  Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the Statutes of the State of Ohio or the Ordinances of the City of Powell. 
(2)  Conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist and where the conditions are perilous by active and negligent operation thereof. 
(3)  Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health, in violation of this Chapter. 
(4)  Fire hazards. 
(p)  Occupant means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, structure, dwelling, or premises (or a part thereof), whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
(q)  Owner means the owner or owners of the premises including the holder of title thereto subject to contract of purchase, a vendee in possession, a mortgagee or receiver in possession, lessee or joint lessees of the whole thereof or an agent or any other person, firm, corporation, or fiduciary directly in control of the premises. 
(r)  Overhangings means loose and overhanging objects which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(s)  Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
(t)  Property Maintenance Officer means the Zoning and Inspector of the City of Powell or such other public official or deputy property maintenance officer as shall be appointed by the Mayor by the advice and consent of Council. 
(u)  Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes; an accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps, and roots that present a safety hazard, and includes garbage, trash and debris which present an unsanitary and/or safety hazard. 
(v)  Registered mail means registered or certified mail. 
(w)  Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available for rent for sleeping purposes with or without cooking facilities. 
(x)  Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, crockery, and similar materials. 
(y)  Structure means a combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming a construction. 
(z)  Weathering means deterioration, decay, or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.03 - APPLICABILITY. 
(a)  Every residential and non-residential building and the premises on which it is situated in the City, used or intended to be used for dwelling, retail, commercial, business, light manufacturing, or industrial occupancy; shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building has been constructed, altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of this chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment of facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of the building. 
(b)  In any case, where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the City or under the laws of the State, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than any other ordinances of the City or of the laws of the State, then the higher standard contained in any such ordinance or law shall prevail. 
(c)  After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this chapter as well as compliance with the ordinances under which such licenses and permits are granted. 
(d)  No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the City applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner or occupant from complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the City from enforcing any such other provision. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.04 - OWNER AND OCCUPANT DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
(a)  Owners shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and no owner shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility, nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof. 
(b)  Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter the respective obligations and responsibilities of the owner and the occupant shall not be altered or affected by an agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and any other parties. 
(c)  The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisance and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, pedestrians, and other persons utilizing the premises; and free of unsanitary conditions; and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner. It shall be the duty of the owner to keep the premises free of hazards which include but are not limited to refuse, natural growth, and/or overhangings. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.05 - EXTERIOR APPEARANCE OF PREMISES AND STRUCTURES. 
(a)  Residential. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling structures, and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standard set forth in this chapter and so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the immediate neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values, including the following. 
(1)  Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street, or other public area, equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial uses, unless permitted under the Zoning Ordinance from the premises. 
(2)  Storage of inoperable, unlicensed or junk vehicles. Outdoor storage of inoperable, unlicensed or unused motor vehicles or trailers or parts thereof on a lot, for a period in excess of seven days is prohibited. Said vehicles stored on the premises must be stored within a building so as not to be visible from any adjoining property or public road. Such vehicles shall not be used for storage or other purposes unless enclosed within a building on the premises. 
(3)  Landscaping. Premises shall be maintained. Lawns, hedges, and bushes shall be kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view, and where same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property and impairing the good residential character of the immediate neighborhood. 
(4)  Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed matter, pictures, or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely maintained or, when no longer in use, completely removed. 
(5)  Maintenance of exteriors of dwelling structures and secondary or appurtenant structure. 
A.  All exterior parts of every dwelling structure, including exterior walls, parapet walls, decorative additions, chimneys, fences, and all other exterior structures, either above or below the roof line, shall be maintained in a safe condition, weathertight, and so as to resist decay or deterioration from any cause. 
B.  Any dwelling structure or secondary or appurtenant structure whose exterior surface is bare, deteriorated, ramshackle, tumbledown, decaying, disintegrating, or in poor repair must be repaired or razed. 
1.  All buckled, rotted, or decayed walls, doors, windows, porches, floors, steps, trim, railings and their missing members, must be replaced and put in good condition. 
2.  All replacements must match and conform to original design or be replaced completely. 
3.  The structure shall be maintained free of broken windows, crumbling stone or brick, or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and the adjoining properties and the immediate neighborhood protected from blighting influences. 
(b)  Nonresidential. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall be reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the immediate neighborhood so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for the adjoining property owner nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the immediate neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values, including the following: 
(1)  Landscaping. Premises shall be maintained. Lawns, hedges, and bushes shall be kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to the public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor which depreciates any adjoining property. 
(2)  Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use, shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have weathered or are faded, or those upon which the paint has peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith, or put into a good state of repair. All nonconforming or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. 
(3)  Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept free of foreign substances, except when necessary in the course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window display areas or other areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless such areas are first screened from public view by drapes, by venetian blinds, or by other permanent rendering of the windows to make them opaque to the public view. All screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and an attractive manner and kept in a good state of repair. 
(4)  Store fronts. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or a nuisance. In the event repairs to a store front become necessary such repairs shall be made with the same (or with similar) materials as used in the construction of the store front in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible above a store front shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair. 
(5)  Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk, or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair, and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event such awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or similar materials, such cloth or plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.06 - FREEDOM FROM INFESTATION. 
    All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation by insects or termites and rodents. All provisions for garbage shall be constructed so as not to be accessible to dogs, cats or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.07 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Property Maintenance Officer. The Zoning Officer of the City is hereby designated to serve as the Property Maintenance Officer hereunder together with such additional or other public officials to serve as deputy or otherwise appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council; all inspections, regulations and enforcement on violations of the provision of this chapter, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under the direction or supervision of the foregoing officials. 
(b)  When Inspections Are To Be Made. 
(1)  Residential. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspection from time to time by the enforcing officer of the City. At the time of such inspections, all the exterior parts of the premises must be available and accessible for such inspection, and the owner, and occupant are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspection. Such inspection shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., unless the premises are not available during the foregoing hours for inspections, or there is a reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, thereby requiring inspection and abatement without delay. 
(2)  Nonresidential. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspection from time to time by the enforcing officer. At the time of such inspections, all exterior parts of the premises must be available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner or occupant are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be made during the regular open hours of the business occupying such premises unless there is a reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, thereby requiring inspection and abatement without delay. 
(3)  Conduct of Inspectors. Inspectors shall conduct themselves so as to avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.08 - WHERE ACCESS BY INSPECTORS IS REFUSED. 
(a)  Where the Property Maintenance Officer or his agent is refused access, or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner or occupant from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties contained herein. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions herein, the Property Maintenance Officer may apply to the Delaware Municipal Court, upon affidavit, for a search warrant, setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the premises and, if the Court is satisfied as to the matter set forth in such affidavit, the Court may authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. A warrant for access may be issued by the Court upon affidavit of the Property Maintenance Officer establishing the grounds therefore. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.09 - PROCEDURE WHERE VIOLATION IS DISCOVERED. 
    Where a violation of this chapter or the regulations hereunder is found to exist, a written notice from the Property Maintenance Officer shall be served upon the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. 
(a)  Contents of Notice. The notice shall specify the violation or the violations committed, what must be done to correct the same, a reasonable period of time (not to exceed 45 days) to correct or abate the violation, the right of the person served to request a hearing, and that the notice shall become an Order of the Property Maintenance Officer in ten days after service, unless a hearing is requested pursuant to the provisions in subsection (c) herein. 
(b)  Service of Notice. Notice may be served personally or by mail with postage prepaid, addressed, to the last known address of the person to be served. Where it is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the last known address shall be the address of the owner as shown in the office of the Delaware County Auditor. If the last known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of the building. The Property Maintenance Officer shall file and provide notice to any owner or occupant of any violation at any address other than the last known address provided hereunder if such other address is filed with the Property Maintenance Officer personally or by certified mail addressed to the Property Maintenance Officer. Date of service of the notice shall be determined (where service is by mail) as the day following the day of mailing for notices to addresses within the City and as of the fourth day after the day of mailing for notices to addresses outside the City. Where the day of service would fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of service shall be the next regular delivery day. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein contained where premises are subject to registration and have been so registered, notice served upon the agent designated therein shall constitute service upon the owner, or lessor of the premises, jointly and severally. 
(c)  Notice To Become An Order Unless Hearing Is Requested. Within ten days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing thereon before Council, serving a written request within the ten day period, in person or by mail, on the Clerk and Mayor. Such request for a hearing before the Council shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed at the hearing. The Clerk, upon receipt of the request shall, within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved, set the matter down for hearing. 
(d)  Determination at Hearing. At any hearing provided hereunder, the Council shall be vested with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest by the issuance and service of subpoena; to require by subpoena the production of books, records, or other documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by them; and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any other for the enforcement of any such subpoena, as provided by law. Determination shall be made within ten days from the completion of the hearing. The Council shall issue an order either incorporating the determination and directions contained in the notice, modifying the same, or withdrawing the notice. 
(e)  Extension of Time. The Property Maintenance Officer may extend the time for correction or abatement of the violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the time for completion may be extended for a period of time not to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice. 
(f)  Noncompliance with Notice. Whenever the owner, agent, occupant, or operator of a structure or premises fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any notice of the Property Maintenance Officer that becomes a final order, the Property Maintenance Officer may advise the Solicitor of the circumstances, and request him to institute an appropriate legal action to compel compliance. 
(g)  Referral of Violations. Any violation of any ordinance other than this chapter, discovered by the Property Maintenance Officer or his representative, shall be reported to the official or agency responsible for the enforcement of such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.10 - APPLICATION FOR INSPECTION. 
    Whenever an owner or occupant, a bona fide prospective purchaser, mortgagee, or a bona fide prospective occupant requests an inspection in order to ascertain if any section of this chapter has been violated, the Property Maintenance Officer shall, upon payment of the fee hereunder stated, cause an inspection to be made of the premises and issue an informational certificate or report of the inspection to the applicant, indicating therein any violation of this chapter on the premises. The applicant for such inspection shall state in writing his full name, his residence, and the reasons and basis for which the inspection is requested. The Property Maintenance Officer may deny the application for failure to comply with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.11 - APPLICATION FOR STATUS REPORT. 
    Where, in lieu of an inspection, an owner or occupant, lessee, bona fide prospective purchaser, mortgagee, or bona fide prospective occupant requests a status report as to whether or not there are any known violations presently pending on such premises, upon payment of the fee prescribed herein and the written request, a copy of any notice or order or any violation then pending shall be sent to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.12 - INSPECTION AND STATUS REPORT FEES. 
    The fee for any inspection or status report of any structure made at the request of the owner, occupant, or agent of either the owner or the occupant shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.13 - CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY. 
(a)  Who May Apply. Where any owner or occupant is required to make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply with this chapter without having right of access to the building or premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or under his control, and where right of access has been refused the owner or occupant; or where the owner or person responsible for granting permission cannot be found or located; then, upon the filing of an affidavit setting forth the facts with the Property Maintenance Officer, the Property Maintenance Officer shall serve a five day notice, in writing, of a hearing upon the owner or the occupant of any adjoining premises affected by the application. 
(b)  Hearing. On the day fixed for hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide opportunity for the owner or occupant of the adjoining property or properties to state why access should not be granted across such adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.14 - ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE AND CONDITIONS. 
    If the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that access is deemed absolutely necessary for compliance with this chapter, then the Planning and Zoning Commission shall issue a certificate of necessity setting forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property, reasonable time limits during which such certificate shall operate, precautions to be taken to avoid damages and, where the Planning and Zoning Commission deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of any persons seeking access to secure the adjoining property against damage to persons or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed $10,000.00 unless conditions deemed advisable by the Planning and Zoning Commission appear otherwise; and the amount set shall take into consideration the extent, nature, and the duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement on the premises affected, and the potential risk of damage thereto. The bond shall be filed with the Property Maintenance Officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.15 - PROCEDURE WHERE ACCESS IS REFUSED. 
    Any refusal to comply with this section or any interference with access to premises pursuant to a certificate issued hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter and, in addition to the penalties provided hereunder, the Property Maintenance Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Municipal Court for a warrant under the procedure set forth herein or to the Common Pleas Court for an order granting access to the subject premises. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.16 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1323.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Fines For Violations. A first violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for the violation committed hereunder. Each violation of a section of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation. Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons, this section shall also apply to any agent, superintendent, officer, member, or director, or partner who shall alone or with others have charge, care, or control of the premises. 
Any subsequent offense pursuant to any section of this chapter shall result in a fine of not more than $300.00 for each violation committed hereunder. Each violation of a section of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Other Legal Action. The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Solicitor from instituting an appropriate action of proceeding in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful repair or maintenance; or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; to require compliance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or the orders or determinations of the Property Maintenance Officer or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, 2-21-1995; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
TITLE FIVE - MUNICIPAL BUILDING CODE 
CHAPTER 1325 - GENERAL PROVISION AND CODE PENALTY[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Technical codes adopted, see Title Three of Part Thirteen 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, O.R.C.  715.26, 715.29, 737.28, 737.37 

1325.01 - SCOPE. 
    Within the City of Powell, Ohio, this Building Code covers: 
(a)  All buildings and structures used for single family, two family and three family, non-industrialized, residential units, and their associated accessory buildings or structures, including but not limited to garages, carports, barns, storage building larger than 75 square feet of floor area, decks, swimming pools, and patios. This Building Code does not apply to any building for which a permit is required from the Department of Commerce of the State of Ohio or any building or structure of less than 75 square feet of floor area. 
(b)  The demolition of any building or structure within the City which has more than 75 square feet of floor area. 
(c)  The moving of any building or structure, which has more than 75 square feet of floor area, through, into, or out of the City. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions of words given in this section shall be used in this Building Code unless the context of any section of any chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are not applicable. 
    Accessory use or building means a portion of a building or a subordinate building whose use is incidental to the permitted use of the remainder of the building or the main building. 
    Alteration: 
(1)  Alter or Alteration means any change in, addition to, rearrangement of, or modification in construction of the existing facilities, or, the moving of partitions from one location or position to another. 
(2)  Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, lintels, beams or girders, or floor construction. 
    Builder means any person, corporation or entity to which a building permit is issued. 
    Building or Structure means an edifice, or any construction or arrangement of construction, materials located under or above the surface of the ground which falls under the jurisdiction of this Building Code. 
    Building Inspector is any person, corporation, or entity serving as the authorized representative of the Chief Building Official. 
    Chief Building Official is the person, corporation or entity authorized and empowered by the Council to administer and enforce this Building Code. 
    Garage means building or portion of a building for the housing of motor vehicles. 
    Lot line means the line of demarcation between properties, either public or private. 
    Nonindustrialized Residential Units are all residential units which are not defined as "industrialized residential units" in Section 3781.06 of the Ohio Revised Code as such sections may be amended, revised or incorporated into other sections of the Ohio Revised Code. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or part of a building is used or intended to be used. Change of occupancy is not construed to include change of tenants or properties. 
    Residence, dwelling means the general term implying place of human habitation. 
(1)  Single family dwelling means a residential building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by one family. 
(2)  Two family dwelling means a residence building arranged, intended or designed for two families living independently of each other and each doing their own cooking in or at the premises occupied by that family upon facilities for such purposes used exclusively by that family. 
(3)  Three family dwelling means a residence building arranged, intended or designed for three family living independently of each other and each doing their own cooling in or at the premises occupied by that family upon facilities for such purposes used exclusively by that family. 
    Shall is mandatory. 
    Use means the application of premises or building to a particular purpose. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.03 - CONFORMANCE REQUIRED. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be constructed, altered, remodeled, razed, relocated or removed except in conformity with the provisions of this Building Code and any lawful rule of the Chief Building Official made hereunder. 
(b)  No building, structure or part thereof that has been erected or altered in violation of the provisions of the Building Code after its effective date may be maintained, occupied or used. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.04 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed  1325.04, which pertained to codes adopted and derived from Ord. No. 87-26, adopted October 20, 1987. 
1325.05 - CONFLICT OF REGULATIONS. 
    Whenever any provision of the Building Code conflicts with or is inconsistent with the provisions of codes adopted by reference herein the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.06 - REPAIRS; ENLARGEMENTS; CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL'S AUTHORITY. 
(a)  No building shall hereafter be altered or enlarged in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of this Building Code. 
(b)  No existing building shall be altered or repaired when the value of such alterations or repairs is equal or greater than one-half of the value of the building, exclusive of the value of the foundation, unless upon completion of such alterations or repairs, the entire building will meet all requirements for the buildings hereafter erected. 
(c)  Any existing building which may be damaged to an extent of 50 percent or more of its value, exclusive of the value of the foundation, may be repaired or rebuilt only when upon completion of such repairs or rebuilding the entire building will meet all the requirements for buildings hereafter erected. Any existing building which is damaged to an extent of 50 percent or more of its value, exclusive of the value of the foundation, and cannot be repaired in such a manner as to meet the requirements of this Building Code, must be torn down. 
(d)  Under the provisions of this section the amount and extent of the damage and the value of the building damaged, altered, repaired or sought to be altered, repaired or rebuilt, shall be determined by the Chief Building Official. Provided, however, that any property owner dissatisfied with the determination may file a written notice of appeal from the Chief Building Official's decision with the Council which shall act upon such appeal within 30 days of receipt of same by the City Clerk and affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.07 - MOVING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES. 
(a)  No person shall move any building or structure having more than 75 square feet of floor area into, out of, or through the City without obtaining a permit from the Chief Building Official. The applicant shall provide evidence acceptable to the Chief Building Official of sufficient bonds or insurance coverage to pay all damages to the property of the City or of other persons, caused by, or in any way growing out of, the moving of any building in the City, or the occupancy of any street or alley by such building or the equipment used in connection with such operations and will pay all damages for injury to or death of any person or persons arising from such moving or occupancy; and shall indemnify and save harmless the City from all liability, loss, damages and expenses of every nature growing out of such moving or occupancy. 
(b)  The Chief Building Official shall, designate the streets or other public places to be used in the moving of such building or structure, together with the time which such building or structure may remain upon the street or other public place and it shall be unlawful for any person to take a different route than the one designated in such permit or to allow a building or structure to remain in the streets or public places a longer time than so designated. 
(c)  No building or structure shall be permitted to be in any street or alley, or part thereof, from 30 minutes before sunset to 30 minutes after sunrise, unless the licensee moving such building shall adequately warn all persons using such street or alley of the obstruction by placing adequate signs, lights and barricades. 
(d)  The terms of the permit shall include other requirements as deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.08 - DEMOLITION 
(a)  No person shall demolish a building or structure having more than 75 square feet of floor area without obtaining a permit from the Chief Building Official. The applicant shall provide evidence acceptable to the Chief Building Official of sufficient bonds or insurance coverage to pay all damages to property of the City or other persons, caused by, or growing out of the demolition of the building or structure, including the hauling away of the material, structure, parts and debris, and shall indemnify and save harmless the City from all liability, loss, damage and expense of every nature growing out of such demolition activities. 
(b)  No demolition activity shall begin or be carried out without adequate lights, barricades and signs to safeguard the public or without gaining approval of the plan and schedule of demolition. 
(c)  The terms of the permit shall include the requirements as deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.09 - REMOVAL OF STOP WORKING ORDERS PROHIBITED. 
    No person or corporation shall remove or cause the removal of a posted stop work order on any structure, building or premise except the Chief Building Official or his authorized representative. The removal of a stop work order shall subject the person or corporation to the revocation of any or all licenses to work in the City; the revocation of any or all permits issued for the structure, building or premise for which the stop work order was issued and the general code penalty of Section 1325.99. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.10 - NOTICE. 
    Unless otherwise stated in this Building Code, written notice shall be deemed to have been given at such time as it is posted on the building, structure or the premises on which the revocation or conditions causing the written notice have been found or are associated with. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1325.99 - GENERAL CODE PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any Code adopted herein fails to comply with any provision of this Building Code for which no other penalty has been provided, or fails to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, or builds in violation of a building permit or certificate issued thereunder shall be guilty of misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each and every violation and noncompliance. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. The imposition of a penalty shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and the application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1327 - DIVISION OF BUILDING REGULATIONS[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed and reenacted Chapter 1327,  1327.01-1327.09, and 1327.99 to read as herein setout. Former Chapter 1327 pertained to similar subject matter. Historical notations have been retained for reference. 
Cross reference- Permits and fees, Ch. 1329; Certificate of occupancy, Ch. 1335 

1327.01 - ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES. 
(a)  There is established in the City the Division of Building Regulation which shall be under the jurisdiction of the Committee of Public Safety of the Council. 
(b)  The Division shall consist of a Chief Building Official and such inspectors, deputies and assistants as may be provided by Council. The positions shall be filled either through employment of personnel or by contracting with persons or corporations. 
(c)  The Division shall be responsible for carrying out the requirements of, and the enforcement of the Building Code of the City, and such other duties and powers as are now or may hereafter be conferred upon the Division or the employees thereof by the ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.02 - ENFORCEMENT BY THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
    The Chief Building Official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the Building Code. For such purpose, he shall have the powers of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.03 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
    The Chief Building Official shall be the head of the Division of Building Regulations and have the management of all matters and affairs pertaining thereto, including the following: 
(a)  He shall prescribe rules and regulations for the persons or corporations engaged in the service of the Division. Such persons or corporations shall do and perform such duties as he may require or direct and be under his direction, supervision and control. 
(b)  He shall be charged with the survey and inspection of buildings and structures and with the enforcement of all parts of this Building Code. 
(c)  He shall enforce all other laws and ordinances on the same subject matter. 
(d)  He shall be in charge of the examination and approval of all plans and specifications before a permit may be issued and sign and issue all permits, certificates and notices required by this Building Code. 
(e)  He shall issue all contractor licenses required by the Building Code. 
(f)  He shall keep proper record showing the location, value and character of every building, structure or other work for which a certificate or permit is issued and a copy of every report or inspection of a building, structure or work with the name of the inspector making the inspection and the date thereof. 
(g)  He shall determine the value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.04 - QUALIFICATIONS OF CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
    The Chief Building Official shall be an architect or engineer registered in the State of Ohio or be licensed by the Department of Commerce of the State of Ohio as an electrical or structural inspector, have at least five years of experience in building construction, design, or inspection. He shall be generally informed about the quality and strength of building materials, the prevailing methods of building construction, good practice in fire prevention, the accepted requirements for safe exit facilities and the proper installation of plumbing, electrical wiring, elevators and other installations for the safety, comfort and convenience of occupants. He shall be in good health and physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections of buildings in the course of construction. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.05 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. 
    The Chief Building Official and any employees of the Division of Building Regulations is prohibited from knowingly performing any of the following activities for a structure or building for which a permit is to be or has been issued by the Division of Building Regulations. 
(a)  Designing or redesigning any portion, component or part of a structure, system, equipment or use of material for a structure or building. 
(b)  Having any interest whatever in the sale or manufacturing of any material process or device entering into or used in connection with a building or structure. 
(c)  Receiving any fees, gratitude, or items as trade from any source other than the City of Powell for his services and inspections. 
(d)  In the case of consultants, or corporations working under contract to the City for services to the Division of Building Regulations, any work for which prohibited activities have been performed shall be reviewed by another consultant, individual or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.08 - PERSONAL NONLIABILITY. 
    Any suit brought against any officer or employee of the City because of any act performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of the Building Code shall be defended by the City provided said officer or employee is acting within the scope of his employment as such officer or employee until the final termination of the proceedings therein. The City shall save such officer or employee harmless from personal liability. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.09 - COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS. 
    The Chief Building Official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the City Engineer in fixing grades, the Chief of Police in enforcing orders, the City Solicitor in prosecuting violations, and other City officials. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1327.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. In addition to the penalty described in Section 1325.99, any employee of the Division of Building Regulations may be fired upon failure to perform his/her duties as described herein or upon violation of Section 1327.05. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1329 - PERMITS AND FEES[8] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Contractor's registration, Ch. 1331; Certificate of occupancy, Ch. 1335 

1329.01 - PERMITS REQUIRED. 
    No person shall commence to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure in the City or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for each such building or structure from the Chief Building Official and without being licensed from the intended activity by the Chief Building Official. The specific permits are as follows: 
(a)  A Building Permit is required for any work on an existing or new structure or building except for the moving of a building or structure or the demolition of a building or structure, which requires separate permits. A building permit may cover all work or the electrical, plumbing and heating, ventilation and air conditioning work may be covered under separate building permits. The building permit shall include the temporary use of sidewalks or streets for storage of materials or equipment. 
(b)  A Remodeling Permit may be issued for any interior alterations to an existing building or structure which effects less than 50 percent of the finish floor area prior to the interior alterations and costs less than $3,000. 
(c)  A Demolition Permit is required for the demolition and removal of any building or structure having more than 75 square feet of floor area within the City. Approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be obtained prior to the issuance of a demolition permit for any building or structure within the Architectural Review District or any other Zoning District requiring such approval. 
(d)  A Moving Permit is required for the moving through, into or out of the City of Powell, any building or structure which has more than 75 square feet of floor area. Approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be obtained prior to the issuance of a moving permit for any building or structure within the Architectural Review District or any other Zoning District requiring the same. 
(e)  A temporary sanitary facilities permit is required whenever a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) to (d) hereof. Before either a building permit, remodeling permit, demolition permit, or moving permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Powell Building Code, a temporary sanitary facilities permit shall be issued by the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall ascertain, before issuing said permit, that there are adequate temporary toilet facilities located upon the premises or within 300 feet of the premises for which a building, remodeling, demolition or moving permit is issued as otherwise provided pursuant to the terms of the Powell Building Code. The temporary sanitary facilities required herein must be located on the site or within 300 feet of the site for which a building permit, remodeling permit, demolition permit, or moving permit is otherwise issued pursuant to the terms of the Powell Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 90-24, 7-5-1990; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.02 - PERMIT APPLICATION. 
    To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall: 
(a)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block tract, house and street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
(b)  Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building or structure; 
(c)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications as are required in Section 1329.05(a); 
(d)  State the valuation of the proposed work; 
(e)  Give all other information as reasonably may be required by the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.03 - AMENDMENT OF PERMIT. 
    If, during the prosecution of work under a permit, it is necessary to make any changes in the plans or contract, the permit holder shall notify the Chief Building Official in writing of the proposed changes. If approved, the changes shall be added to the original permit file, and if the cost of the work is thereby increased so much as to require a higher permit fee, the additional sum shall be collected in accordance with the schedule set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.04 - UNDERGROUND STRUCTURES. 
(a)  All utilities, prior to installation of any underground structure, shall submit an application in writing stating the name of the utility, the type of the structure and its desired placement to the Mayor for approval. Such application shall be accompanied by a detailed set of plans or drawings showing the type of structure and its exact location. 
(b)  No construction shall be accomplished until the Mayor or his designee approves such application in writing. Should an application not be acted upon within 30 days after it is submitted, the utility may appeal directly to Council for approval. 
(c)  All plans and specifications accompanying an application shall become a permanent part of the City records. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987) 
1329.05 - PLANS; SPECIFICATIONS; CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications. 
(b)  Plans and specifications for buildings or structures shall be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer or qualified draftsman and be drawn to scale upon a substantial paper or cloth of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and to show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Building Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the lot number and subdivision name, the street address of the work and the name of the owner or agent and person who prepared them. Plans shall include a plot plan signed by a registered surveyor showing the location of the proposed building and of every existing building adjacent on the property. In lieu of detailed specifications, the Chief Building Official may approve references on the plans to a specific section or part of the Building Code. Diagrams and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans shall be submitted when required by the Chief Building Official. 
(c)  The outline of the proposed building shall be staked out on the ground by a registered surveyor with sufficient permanency that the inspector may determine that the footers and walls are constructed according to the layout stakes. 
(d)  Plans and specifications need not be submitted for small and unimportant work when authorized by the Chief Building Official. 
(e)  When authorized by the Chief Building Official, the use of a registered surveyor may be waived for building additions, small buildings or structures, and work on or within an existing building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.06 - GRADING PLAN REQUIRED. 
    No building permit shall be issued until a grading plan showing existing and proposed grades and drainage from or onto adjacent property has been approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987) 
1329.07 - PERMIT ISSUANCE. 
(a)  Applications, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a permit shall be examined by the Chief Building Official or his authorized representative. Plans shall be forwarded to other City departments for review if deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official, to determine compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the Chief Building Official is satisfied that the work described in the application for a permit and the plan filed will conform to the requirements of the Building Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant, provided that prior to issuing the Building Permit, the applicant has submitted proof in form and substance satisfactory to the Chief Building Official that: 
(1)  The proposal has been submitted in writing to the Homeowners Association involved with the property in question, if architectural review is required by deed restrictions. 
(2)  That such submittal was received by the Association. 
(3)  That one of the following has occurred: 
A.  That the applications have been approved by the Association. 
B.  That more than thirty days have elapsed since such submittal and such submittal has not been denied by the Homeowners Association or the Homeowners Association has failed to take any action in writing denying such application. 
C.  The Homeowner Association has acted in denying such application and listed the reasons behind such denial, but the Commissioner finds the homeowner has made a good faith effort to accommodate the concerns of the Homeowners Association. 
(b)  When the Chief Building Official issues the permit, he shall endorse in writing or stamp on sets of plans and specifications "APPROVED." Approved plans and specifications from the Chief Building Official shall not be changed without written authorization of the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 99-84, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.08 - REFUSAL OF PERMITS. 
    The Chief Building Official shall refuse a permit to an applicant: 
(a)  Who has outstanding and unpaid judgments against him arising from or growing out of failure to perform work under a construction contract or failure to perform work in a good and workmanlike manner. 
(b)  Who has previously obtained a permit by making material misrepresentations. 
(c)  Who has previously performed work on a premises knowing that the permit thereof was obtained by material fraudulent misrepresentations. 
(d)  Who is in violation of this Building Code, who is under citation by the Chief Building Official for any violation of the Building Code, or who has willfully failed to comply with a lawful order of the Chief Building Official or his authorized representative. 
(e)  Who has failed to obtain a contractor's license from the City. 
(f)  Who cannot substantiate the technical expertise or financial ability to complete the work in accordance with the plans and specifications in a timely manner as determined by the Building Department. 
(Ord. No. 00-21, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.09 - RETENTION OF PLANS. 
    One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the Chief Building Official for a period of not less than the requirements set forth in the City of Powell Retention Schedule. One or more sets of the approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, of which one set shall be kept on such building or work at all times during which the work authorized is in progress. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.10 - EFFECT OF PERMIT ISSUANCE. 
(a)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for an approval of any violation of any provisions of the Building Code. 
(b)  The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the Chief Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the Building Code or any other ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed  1329.11, which pertained to permit expiration and derived from Ord. No. 87-26, adopted October 20, 1987. 
1329.12 - PERMIT REVOCATION; NOTICE. 
    Each permit issued by the Chief Building Official shall be subject to revocation by the Chief Building Official whenever it appears that such building or structure is being constructed so that any part of it encroaches upon any street, alley, easement or other public lands; that such building or structure is being constructed as to violate any of the terms or requirements of the Building Code or any ordinance of the City or any State law; or that there has been a material misrepresentation made to obtain the permit. Written notice shall be given of such revocation as required in Section 1325.10. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1329.13 - FEES REQUIRED; DOUBLE FEES. 
(a)  Any person desiring to do or cause to be done any work for which a permit is issued shall pay fees as provided on the Fee Schedule established by the Council and in force on the date permit is issued or the approval is given. 
(b)  Where work for which a permit is required by the Building Code is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining such a permit, the fees shall be doubled but the payment of double fees shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with requirements of the Building Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987) 
1329.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
Ord. No. 87-20, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1331 - CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Permits and fees, Ch. 1329; Certificate of occupancy, Ch. 1335 

1331.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED. 
    The City of Powell/Liberty Township Department of Building Regulations hereby requires registration and insurance for all electrical, mechanical, plumbing/hydronics, fire protection, subcontractors, general contractors and water and sewer line installers or any other trade performing services in the City/Township on any project. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1331.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Electrical contractor: Any person who is engaged in the business, or who, pursuant to written or oral agreement with another person, undertakes any electrical work or portion thereof involving that particular trade, art or craft. 
(b)  Mechanical/Refrigeration contractor: Any person who is engaged in the business, or who, pursuant to written or oral agreement with another person, undertakes any heating, ventilating, air conditioning, or refrigeration work or portion thereof involving that particular trade, art or craft. 
(c)  Plumbing/Hydronics contractor: Any person who is engaged in the business, or who pursuant to a written or oral agreement with another person, undertakes any plumbing/hydronics work or portion thereof involving that particular trade, art or craft. 
(d)  Fire protection contractor: Any person, who is engaged in the business, or who, pursuant to written or oral agreement with another person, undertakes the fire protection work or portion thereof involving that particular trade, art or craft. 
(e)  General contractor: Any person who is engaged in the business, or who, pursuant to written or oral agreement with another person, undertakes any general construction work, on a project requiring a permit issued by the Building Department. 
(f)  Other trade: Any person who is engaged in the business, or who, pursuant to written or oral agreement with another person undertakes any work on any project requiring a permit issued by the Building Department including but not limited to, signs, concrete, landscaping, drywall, masonry, stucco, insulation, excavation, painting, roofing, paving, carpentry (e.g. rough, trim), fireplaces, moving (e.g. structures/buildings), etc. 
(g)  Subcontractor: Any person who performs a special skill, trade, craft or profession as a business for profit in the City, and as part of a construction contract, whether on behalf of the general contractor, building owner, or the agent of an owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011) 
1331.03 - REQUIRED REGISTRATIONS/EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Act or hold himself or herself to be a contractor, or undertake to perform any such work as a contractor, without first having obtained a registration certificate in the manner specified in this chapter, provided, however, that in the event such person shall be a firm or corporation, it may act as or represent itself to be a contractor if any work is under the actual and immediate supervision of a duty and appropriately registered member, partner, officer or employee of such firm or corporation. 
(2)  Permit or cause any work as hereinafter defined to be undertaken or performed other than by a duly registered contractor on a contract with an owner or lessee or an owner and a lessee. 
(b)  Any contractor whether general or subcontractor shall not permit his name or registration to be used by another owner, contractor or agent. Any contractor found guilty of violating this section shall, subject to appeal, immediately forfeit his registration for a period of one year, without refund of any registration fees. 
(c)  Exemptions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following are not required to be registered: 
(1)  The property owner who performs the work himself or herself. 
(2)  Work done or caused to be done by the United States of America, the State of Ohio, or any agency or subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011) 
1331.04 - REGISTRATION PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any such foregoing certificates and recommendations, the Building Department may issue registration certificates in accord therewith, provided, however that it shall not be mandatory upon the Building Department to issue any such registration certificate should it be established to its satisfaction that the applicant in question has been guilty of any of the acts or practices for which a registration certificate could be revoked as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Every registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the same shall be issued. No registration fee required under the provisions of this chapter shall, after payment thereof to the City, be refunded for any cause whatsoever. 
(c)  No registration certificate shall be issued or continue in effect pursuant thereto unless the applicant has prepaid to the City a registration fee or a renewal fee as set forth herein. If the renewal fee is not received by January 31, new registration will be required at the fee for new registration. In addition, the applicant shall give evidence that the following items are valid and remain in effect for the duration of the registration certificate: 
(1)  General liability insurance of $500,000.00. 
(2)  A Certificate of Workers' Compensation when the applicant employs one or more people. 
(3)  Those contractors performing radon mitigation must be licensed by the Ohio Department of Health pursuant to O.R.C.  3723.02 and shall furnish a copy of their license at the time of application. 
(4)  Contractors performing electrical, mechanical or refrigeration, plumbing, or hydronics, must be licensed by the Ohio Construction Industry Licensing Board pursuant to O.R.C.  4740.01 and shall furnish a copy of their license at the time of application. 
(5)  Fire protection contractors shall be certified or fire protection installers shall be licensed by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to O.R.C.  3781.105 and shall furnish a copy of their certification or license at the time of application. 
(d)  Any individual desiring a certificate of registration shall be 18 years of age or older and shall make a written application and file the same with the Building Department. Every application shall be on forms prescribed and shall furnish all information and data required thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1331.05 - REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. 
(a)  Upon written complaint of any person, and after investigation of the complaint, the Building Department may recommend to the Chief Building Official (CBO) that the contractor's registration certificate be revoked. The CBO may, upon recommendation of the Building Department, authorize and empower the Building Department to revoke, modify, or suspend any registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any of the following acts or omissions of the holder of any certificate: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the Building Code; 
(2)  Misrepresentation of a material fact in order to become registered or in the renewal of registration; 
(3)  Failure to secure permits, inspections and approvals required by this Building Code and regulations of the Building Department; 
(4)  Use of registration to obtain a permit for another; 
(5)  Having outstanding violations of the Building Code or outstanding violations issued by the Building Official; 
(6)  Continuing work after receipt of stop work order; 
(7)  Having a building permit refused or revoked; 
(8)  Failure or refusal to correct a violation of the Building Code within a prescribed period of time or to correct incompetent work as ordered by the Building Official or the Building Official's designee; 
(9)  Unethical business practices; a conviction of moral turpitude; or when revocation is deemed necessary in the public interest; 
(10)  Conversion of property or funds belonging to another; 
(11)  Failure to complete any contract or work undertaken under the authority of such registration certificate; 
(12)  Unreasonable delay in the prosecution or completion of any work to which such a registration certificate may be a party; 
(13)  Use of unapproved or fraudulent material; 
(14)  Departure from the plans or specifications prescribed by any provision of law or ordinance; 
(15)  Involuntary petition in bankruptcy by such registration certificate holder or an assessment by him or her for the benefit of his or her creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take charge of the property, assets and affairs of such registration certificate holder; or 
(16)  For any valid reason adversely affecting health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. 
(b)  However, no registration certificate shall be revoked without at least 15 days advance written notice by the Building Department to the registration certificate holder to such effect and without affording to such registration certificate holder the opportunity to appeal by submitting the request in writing and stating the reason for the appeal and filing the request with the CBO of the City of Powell within ten days after receipt of notice of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1331.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 11-1-2011) 
CHAPTER 1335 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY[11] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed and reenacted Chapter 1335,  1335.01-1311.05, and 1335.99 to read as herein setout. Former Chapter 1335 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-26, adopted October 20, 1987. Historical notations have been retained for reference. 
Cross reference- Permits and fees, Ch. 1329; Construction requirements, Ch. 1337 

1335.01 - RESERVED. 
1335.02 - REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATE. 
    The following requirements must be fulfilled and approved prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy: 
(a)  The building or structure is constructed and completed as per plans and specifications. 
(b)  The curb box and water valve are installed properly. 
(c)  The curb, driveway approach and public sidewalk are free from cracks and constructed as per the requirements of the City. 
(d)  All manholes and sewers located on private property are free from debris and installed properly and to grade. 
(e)  All final grades are completed as per accepted plot and grading plans, the lot pins are in and the lot is seeded or sodded. 
(f)  The lot and street in front of the lot is clean, free of debris, mud and building material. 
(g)  All fees and penalties have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1335.03 - RESERVED. 
1335.04 - REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE. 
    A request for a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be granted by the Building Inspector upon request when: 
(a)  The requirements of Section 1335.02(a) and (g) have been met; 
(b)  In the opinion of the Chief Building Official, the requirements of Section 1335.02(a), through (f) that have not been met are delayed for valid reasons and the delay in their completion will not endanger the health and safety of any resident of the City. 
(c)  A letter signed by the property owner, the general contractor and an officer of the financial institution making the permanent loan on the property, or the property owner and general contractor or such other persons or organizations acceptable to the Chief Building Official when there will be no permanent loan on the property, stating that sufficient funds have been escrowed for the purpose of completing the work required for the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy together with the completion date. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1335.05 - RESERVED. 
1335.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1337 - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS[12] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed and reenacted Chapter 1337,  1337.01-1337.19, and 1337.99 to read as herein setout. Former Chapter 1337 pertained to similar subject matter and originally derived from Ord. No. 87-26, adopted October 20, 1987; and Ord. No. 2004-06, adopted February 17, 2004. Historical notations have been retained for reference. 
Cross reference- Ohio Building Code, Ch. 1311; Residential Code of Ohio, Ch. 1315; Swimming pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs, Ch. 1339 

1337.01 - MODIFICATION OF REFERENCE CODES MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. 
    Certain provisions of the codes which were adopted in Section 1325.04 are modified or expanded upon by the requirements of this chapter. The most restrictive provisions of this chapter or the reference codes shall apply. The requirements set forth in this chapter and Section 1325.04 are minimum requirements for construction and nothing contained herein or in the reference codes shall be construed as preventing the builder or property owner from using more restrictive, safer or stronger procedures, materials or equipment. Any disputes which arise regarding whether or not any procedure, material, or equipment meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the reference code or this chapter, shall be resolved by the Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.02 - CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct construction operations between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Saturday and 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 noon Sunday, Memorial Day, July 4th and Labor Day, or at any time on Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's Day except by written conditional permit issued by the Chief Building Official. 
(b)  Before construction begins a gravel driveway and storage area shall be installed of sufficient size to provide enough area to park vehicles and for delivery vehicles to use. Additional gravel area is to be provided if materials are to be stored on gravel. All equipment and vehicles shall use the gravel drive to enter and leave the lot. 
(c)  The builder shall clean the streets on a daily basis of all mud and debris resulting from his construction and associated activities regardless of where the mud and debris is deposited. 
(d)  Within ten days after the foundation walls are completed and backfilled or as soon after ten days as weather permits, all the disturbed areas of the lot, except an area within 20 feet of the foundation wall, shall be leveled sufficiently to permit the application of temporary seeding and shall be seeded. Temporary seeding shall be annual rye grass applied at the minimum rate of two pounds per 1,000 square feet either raked into the ground or mulched. The disturbed areas covered by gravel will not require temporary seeding. 
(e)  In lieu of temporary seeding the builder may, within ten days after the foundation walls are completed and backfilled, stake straw bales along the lot lines where the runoff water enters the street right-of-way or a drainage course which drains more than one lot. The bales shall be staked so that they will trap settlement from the runoff water. The bales shall be maintained and the area behind the bales kept clear of settlement until the lot is seeded or sodded. 
(f)  Each builder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the costs and penalties provided for herein for violation of this section if he fails to comply within 24 hours of receipt of written notice of violation from the Chief Building Official, excluding Sundays and national holidays. Written notice shall have been deemed received at such time as it is posted on the lot from which or on which a violation is found. 
(g)  Upon receipt of the notice of violation or upon becoming aware that this section has been violated, the builder may request in writing, a time extension of no more than 48 hours from the Chief Building Official prior to the expiration of the 24 hour period after the posting of the notice of violation. Additional time extensions may only be granted by the Mayor in writing. 
(h)  Failure of the builder to make corrections within 24 hours of receipt of notice of violation or within the time limit set in a time extension which has been granted by the City, shall result in a $100.00 fine. Each day the violation for which the notice was given continues should result in an additional $100.00 per day fine. 
(i)  If the violation has not been remedied after five days, of the receipt of notice of violation or the end of the time extension granted by the City, excluding Sunday and national holidays, the Chief Building Official shall place a stop order on the construction and no further work shall be done until the violation is corrected and the fines paid. 
(j)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until any and all fines have been paid and any and all violations corrected. 
(k)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the City from pursuing other remedies of law. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 01-75, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.03 - SAFEGUARDING THE PUBLIC. 
    It shall be the duty of all owners, contractors, builders, or persons having control or supervision of any or all buildings, structures or parts thereof in the course of construction to see that: 
(a)  All excavations are properly protected, and satisfactory measures are taken to safeguard the public against injury resulting from live wires, power tools, insecure scaffolding, falling material, stacked or piled construction material and equipment. 
(b)  Where a permit has been issued which provides for the temporary use of the street for storage of materials, lights, barricades and signs are displayed and maintained at each end of every pile of such material in the street, and that similar warning lights and barricades are displayed for excavations immediately adjacent to sidewalks or public streets. 
(c)  The lot is kept free of building material waste, piles of trash, stumps, brush and leftover materials, and any construction debris. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.04-1337.10. - RESERVED. 
1337.11 - PLUMBING. 
(a)  The waterline into the house shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch diameter until the first half inch waterline takes off from the main waterline. 
(b)  All plumbing fixtures shall have a shut off valve at the fixture. 
(c)  All drain pipes which are to be embedded in concrete shall be at least one and three-fourths inch diameter. 
(d)  When both ABS and PVC plastic pipe are used, transition fittings shall be used to change from one material to the other. 
(e)  Dissimilar metals shall be joined using dielectric fitting. Dissimilar metals shall not be laid next to each other. 
(f)  Septic tanks may be used for sewage only when a public sewage system is not available, and shall be installed and used in compliance with the Delaware County Board of Health Regulations and all other applicable ordinances of the City. 
(g)  Every dwelling house and every building designed for the occupancy of persons within the City shall be separately connected with the public sanitary sewer system when such dwelling house or building is within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer within a street, easement, or other public right-of-way abutting the lot, land or parcel upon which said dwelling house or building designed for the occupancy of persons is located. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.12 - ELECTRICAL. 
(a)  Driveway, front yard and security lights shall be sheltered to prevent over spilling of light onto the neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.15 - NO POLLUTED WATER IN STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. 
    All polluted water from the premises, including backwash water from filters and softeners, and water from swimming and wading pools, and sink and laundry tubs shall be drained into the sanitary sewer system when available. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.16 - LOT PINS. 
    After the completion of site grading and prior to sodding/seeding grade stakes shall be set and inspected by engineering department personnel. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any lot the builder shall furnish a certificate signed by a registered land surveyor stating that iron pins have been set at all lot corners and at all angle points and beginning or ends of curves of front, side and rear lot lines. Iron pins may be one-half inch by 36 inch solid iron bars or three-quarter inch by 30 inch iron pipe driven flush with the ground. If the point to be marked falls in a blacktop drive, a railroad spike not less than six inches long may be used and if the point to be marked falls in a concrete drive, a P.K. nail or drill hole may be used. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.17 - DRIVEWAYS. 
    All driveways shall have an asphalt, concrete or brick surface course. Other materials may be approved for use by the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.18 - SEEDING OR SODDING. 
    All areas disturbed during construction shall be seeded, sodded and landscaped in a manner to provide sufficient ground cover to eliminate erosion. This does not mean that areas cannot be left in a natural state or returned to a natural state provided that erosion is controlled. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.19 - EXTERIOR SIDING STORAGE AND INSTALLATION. 
(a)  The handling and storage of all siding materials shall be done utilizing the best available construction methods. Manufacturer specifications for handling and storage of all exterior siding materials shall be followed. The recommendations in recognized building industry evaluation service reports shall also be followed. 
(b)  Cement-fiber product requirements: 
(1)  Upon delivery, any cement-fiber product must not be stored with exposure to weather and be stored on a flat and level surface as determined appropriate by the Chief Building Official. 
(2)  The use of code accepted rigid wall sheathing and weather resistant wrap is required. No less than 5/8" foam rigid wall sheathing is required if foam is utilized. 
(c)  On any existing residence, the total replacement of any existing siding material with new siding material shall require the removal of the existing siding material and installation of the new material as required by code and this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1337.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalties. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1339 - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS[13] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, adopted September 19, 2017 repealed and reenacted Chapter 1339,  1339.01-1339.11, and 1339.99 to read as herein setout. Former Chapter 1339 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-26, adopted October 20, 1987; and Ord. No. 2016-18 , adopted June 7, 2016. 
Cross reference- Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs of the ICC International Residential Code/2009. 

1339.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    In addition to the definitions in Section 1325.02, the following definitions are to be used in the chapter. 
    Approved water supply means water supply approved by the Health Commissioner. 
    Commercial swimming pool means a public swimming pool, with an approved water supply, which is located on land not publicly owned and operated on a commercial basis or primarily for private gain. 
    Health Commissioner means the health authority having jurisdiction over swimming pools in the City of Powell or his authorized representatives. 
    Person means any person, firm, corporation, association, organization or institution. 
    Private swimming pool means a swimming pool used only by the owner of the pool and friends as an additional accessory use at a private residence. 
    Private wading pool means a wading pool used only by the owner of the pool and friends. 
    Prohibited pools means all bodies of water and watercourses, where bathing and wading are prohibited. 
    Public swimming pool means any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool, provided with an approved water supply, public or semipublic in character. 
    Public wading pool means any other pool. 
    Swimming pool means a natural or artificially constructed area, either permanent or portable, filled or capable of being filled with water to a depth of 24 or more inches at any point therein and used, or designated to be used, for swimming or recreational bathing. 
    Wading pool means a natural or artificially constructed area, either permanent or portable, filled or capable of being filled with water at any point therein to a depth of more than 12 inches and less than 24 inches and used, or designated to be used for wading, swimming or other aquatic recreation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.02 - PERMIT AND AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  No person shall locate, construct or install any swimming pool or wading pool or make any change in such pools or appurtenances thereof, unless and until such person has submitted an application and plans therefore, and has secured a permit and authorization from the Chief Building Official. 
(b)  No person shall use, operate, repair or maintain any swimming pool or wading pool except as authorized by the Chief Building Official. 
(c)  Private wading pools that are portable or of temporary construction are exempted from the requirement of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.03 - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall locate, construct, use, operate, repair or maintain any swimming pool or wading pool except in compliance with: 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  The Building Code and other ordinances, standards, rules and regulations enforced by the Building Inspector; 
(c)  The standards, rules and regulations of the Delaware General Health District; and 
(d)  For public pools, the standards, rules and regulations of the State Board of Health governing public swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.04 - ENCLOSURES. 
(a)  No person shall locate, construct, install, make, change, maintain or use a private swimming pool or private wading pool unless the pool or the premises upon which it is located is enclosed by a barrier as prescribed in Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs of the ICC International Residential Code/2009 and the City of Powell Zoning Code. 
(b)  Commercial and Public pools shall meet the enclosed standards set by the Health Commissioner; except, however, the standards set for private pools shall be taken as minimum standards for commercial and public pools. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.05 - LOCATION. 
    No swimming or wading pool shall be located in any front yard on any lot or between any street and any required building line. A swimming pool may be located in part of the rear yard behind a residence as an additional authorized accessory use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.06 - COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS. 
    No swimming pool and no wading pool shall be located, constructed, installed, used, operated or maintained except in compliance with the provisions and regulations for each zoning district and the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. Commercial pools shall be restricted to commercial and industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.07 - SWIMMING PROHIBITIONS. 
    Any body of water not complying with the conditions of Sections 1337.02 and 1337.03 shall not be used for swimming or wading pools and swimming and wading therein shall be prohibited, unless and until the same have been approved by the Chief Building Official as to any structural work and by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.08 - DECKS, CONCRETE APRONS. 
    All swimming pools shall have wooden or concrete decks or aprons at least four feet wide. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.09 - ELECTRICAL 
    All electrical equipment shall comply with the requirements of the current adopted edition of NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code). 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.10 - STRUCTURAL SAFETY. 
    No swimming pool and no wading pool shall be located, constructed or used unless and until the plans therefore have been approved, and the construction of the same has been approved by the Chief Building Official as to structural safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.11 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Provisions shall be made for access, and off-street parking and loading facilities, as required by the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1339.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 1341 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[14] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Property Maintenance Code, Ch. 1323 

1341.01 - NUISANCE. 
    A building or structure or any portion thereof which is structurally unsafe or has inadequate means of ingress or egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life or health is declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated by repair or demolition pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987) 
1341.02 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION. 
(a)  The Chief Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as or believed to be a nuisance as defined in this chapter. Should he find that such structure or any portion thereof constitutes a nuisance, he shall give notice thereof to the owner or owners thereof. Such notice shall also be served upon any purchasers under a recorded land contract and upon the holder of any legal or equitable lien of record on the real property upon which such structure is located. 
(b)  The written notice shall state with specificity the defects that cause such structure to be a nuisance and shall further state that the work necessary to either complete proper repair of the specified defect or demolish and remove the building or structure or specified portion thereof shall be commenced within thirty days and shall set a time for the completion of the demolition or repairs. It shall further state that in the event the structure or portion thereof is demolished and removed the premises shall be left in a safe, sanitary condition. 
(c)  All occupants of such nuisance shall vacate such premises within twenty four hours of the posting of signs on the building, and the notice shall so indicate. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.03 - SERVICE OF NOTICE. 
    Notice shall be served by the Chief Building Official or a person designated by him for such purpose. Notice shall be served by personal service, residence service or certified mail. In the event of a failure to obtain service upon anyone entitled to notice for the reasons that such person's residence is unknown and cannot with reasonable diligence be ascertained, the Chief Building Official shall endorse such fact in his file on the case and may serve such person or entity by causing a true copy of the notice to be published once per week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place in or about the affected building or structure. Service shall be complete upon the second publication. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.04 - POSTING OF SIGNS. 
    Upon completion of the notice procedures of Section 1341.03, the Chief Building Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice which reads: 
"DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE BUILDING. 
BUILDING DEPARTMENT, CITY OF POWELL." 
    Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition completed. No person shall remove such notice before repair or demolition is complete. No person shall enter such building other than policemen or firemen in pursuit of their duties or persons engaged in making the required repairs or in demolishing such building, unless such demolition or repairs are complete. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.05 - EFFECT ON LIEN HOLDERS. 
    The holders of liens of record may contract with the City to perform the required repairs or removal upon failure of the property owner to perform the same within the time allowed by law. 
(a)  The Chief Building Official shall complete the service of notice process and may lift some or all of the restriction at such time as the immediate danger has been removed. 
(b)  The lifting of portions of the restriction stated in a notice does not void any other requirements stated in the notice. 
(c)  The City shall be reimbursed for its costs associated with the requirements of this section. If the City is not immediately reimbursed the amount thereof shall be certified to the County Treasurer and levied as a special assessment against the property on which the building or structure is located and shall be collected in the manner provided for special easements. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.06 - APPEAL. 
(a)  Any person entitled to notice under this chapter may appeal all or any part of the order contained in such notice by filing with the Clerk of Council a written notice of appeal within thirty days of service of such notice. 
(b)  Such notice of appeal shall specify that portion of the order appealed and the name and address of the appealing party. 
(c)  The Clerk of Council shall schedule a hearing before the Planning Commission not less than ten nor more than 45 days from the dates of filing of the notice of appeal. 
(d)  The Clerk shall give notice in writing of the scheduled hearing date, time and place to the appellant and the Chief Building Official and at the time and place so specified, the Commissioner shall appear and show cause to the Planning Commission for the issuance of the order. The Commissioner shall affirm, vacate or modify the order of the Chief Building Official but shall affirm unless, and except to the extent that he fails to show adequate cause for the order. 
(e)  The building shall remain vacant during the appeal process. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.07 - RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. 
    Repair or demolition of the structure, which is the subject of the notice, shall be commenced within thirty days from service of notice, provided that the expiration of such thirty days shall be extended during such period of time as an appeal of the Chief Building Official's order is pending before the Planning Commission. Repair or demolition shall proceed expeditiously and shall be completed within a period of time set by the Chief Building Official or the Planning Commissioner. 
(a)  In the event of failure of the owner of record and/or a purchaser under a land contract to comply with the order of the Chief Building Official or Planning Commissioner or to commence or complete demolition or repair as requested by this chapter, such owner or purchaser shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day of failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in Section 1341.07(a) hereof, the Chief Building Official shall, upon failure of the owner of record, or purchaser under a recorded land contract, to comply with the order to repair or demolish, proceed to have the building or structure demolished and removed from the premises, leaving the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition and cost of such work shall be paid by the City. If the City is not immediately reimbursed for such costs, the amount thereof shall be certified to the County Treasurer and levied as a special assessment against the property on which the building or structure is located and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.08 - EMERGENCY CONDITIONS, WAIVER OF NOTICE. 
    When it is determined by the Chief Building Official that any condition of the building or structure, or any part thereof, presents an immediate danger of physical harm to persons in or adjacent to the building or structure, he shall immediately post signs on the building or structure as provided in Section 1341.03, order the immediate vacation of the building or structure, and if or cause the entrance and surrounding area to be barricaded even though the service of notice process as described in Section 1341.03 has not been completed. 
(a)  The Chief Building Official shall complete the service of notice process and may lift some or all of the restrictions at such time as the immediate danger has been removed. 
(b)  The lifting of any portion of the restriction stated in a notice does not void any other requirements stated in the notice. 
(c)  The City shall be reimbursed for its costs associated with the requirements or this section. If the City is not immediately reimbursed, the amount thereof shall be certified to the County Treasurer and levied as a special assessment against the property on which the building or structure is located and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 2017-45 ,  1, 9-19-2017) 
1341.99 - PENALTY. 
    See Section 1325.99 for General Building Code penalty. 
(Ord. No. 87-26, 10-20-1987) 
PART FIFTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
CHAPTER 1501 - BOCA NATIONAL FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Appeals of orders, O.R.C.  119.12; State certification of firefighters, O.R.C.  737.08, 737.22, 3737.33; State certification of Fire Safety Inspectors, O.R.C.  3737.01(C), 3737.34; Fire investigation, O.R.C.  737.27, 3737.24 et seq.; Entry and Inspection, O.R.C.  737.34 et seq., 3737.14, 3737.41, 3737.42; Common Pleas Court jurisdiction, O.R.C.  3737.44(A), 3737.51(H); Ohio Fire Code, O.R.C.  3737.82 et seq.; OAC Ch. 1301:7-1 et seq.; Fire extinguishing and alarm systems in rest and nursing homes, O.R.C.  3721.071; Self-service filling stations, O.R.C.  3741.14; Fireworks, O.R.C.  3743.27, 3743.32 et seq. 

1501.01 - ADOPTION. 
    The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996, as the same is published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., as the same is amended by Liberty Township Resolution 97-187, shall apply and be in force in the Village for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 97-51, 12-2-1997) 
1501.02 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    For the purposes of enforcing the Fire Prevention Code and the fire prevention measures of the Building Code, the Chief of Liberty Township Fire Department and his designated Fire Prevention Officers are hereby designated Fire Prevention Officers within the City of Powell. 
(Ord. No. 97-51, 12-2-1997) 
CHAPTER 1511 - OPEN BURNING[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See sectional histories for similar state law 
State Law reference- Air pollution control, O.R.C. Ch. 3704; Permit to burn construction debris, O.R.C.  3704.11(C); Spreading fire through negligence, O.R.C.  3737.62; Open burning, OAC Ch. 3745 

1511.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in Chapter 3745-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code and this chapter: 
    Agricultural waste means any waste material generated by crop, horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities, but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure. 
    Economic poisons include but are not restricted to pesticides such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants. 
    Garbage means any waste material resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products. 
    Landscape waste means any plant waste material, except garbage, including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues. 
    Land clearing waste means plant waste material which is removed from land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of land for new agricultural development. 
    Ohio EPA means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies delegated authority by such Director pursuant to O.R.C.  3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio Environmental Protection Agency district office. 
    Open burning means the burning of any materials wherein air contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed specifically to comply with the requirements of Ohio Administrative Code 3745-17-09 or 3745-17-10. 
    Residential waste means any waste material, including landscape waste, generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt, liquid petroleum products, or plastics. 
    Restricted area means the area within the boundary of any municipal corporation established in accordance with the provisions of Title 7 of the Ohio Revised Code, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of any such municipal corporation having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any such municipal corporation having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the latest federal census. 
    Unrestricted area means all areas outside the boundaries of a restricted area as defined in this section hereof. 
State Law reference- (OAC 3745-19-01) 
    Bonfire means an outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes. 
    Recreational fire means an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
State Law reference- (OAC 1301:7-7-03) 
1511.02 - RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision in Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19, no open burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency under Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-25 is in effect. 
(b)  No provisions of Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-19, permitting open burning, and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of any State department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open burning. 
State Law reference- (OAC 3745-19-02) 
1511.03 - OPEN BURNING IN RESTRICTED AREAS. 
(a)  No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a restricted area except as provided in subsections (b)-(d) hereof; in O.R.C.  3704.11 and in compliance with Section 1511.05 of this chapter. 
(b)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA: 
(1)  Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares, heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar occupational needs. 
(2)  Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth, recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met: 
A.  They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas, or equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood; 
B.  They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and 
C.  They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height. 
(3)  Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to paragraph (D)(1)(d) of Rule 3745-50-45 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(4)  Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for commercial or industrial fire prevention. 
(5)  Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa (marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs seized by federal, state or local law enforcement officials. 
Fires allowed by subsections (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(4) hereof shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants. 
(c)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with subsection (b) of Section 1511.04: 
(1)  Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health department, the centers for disease control and prevention, cooperative extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method. 
(2)  Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not meet the requirements of subsection (b)(2) hereof, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours; 
B.  They are not to be used for waste disposal purposes; and 
C.  They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood. 
(3)  Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the following conditions are observed: 
A.  The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants; 
B.  The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways, railroad tracks, or air fields; 
C.  The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than one thousand feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises; 
D.  The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best practicable condition for efficient burning; and 
E.  No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt, liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials. 
(d)  Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 1511.04, provided that any conditions specified in the permission are followed: 
(1)  Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding those materials identified in subsection (b)(3) hereof; 
(2)  Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the control of fire as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) publication 1403: "Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures," provided that the application required in subsection (a)(1) of Section 1511.04 is submitted by the commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction; 
(3)  In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose determined to be necessary by the Director and, if required, performed as identified in the appendix to Rule 3745-19-03 of the Ohio Administrative Code. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral approval; 
(4)  Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range or wildlife management practices; and 
(5)  Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities for motion pictures and television. 
State Law reference- (OAC 3745-19-03) 
1511.04 - PERMISSION TO INDIVIDUALS AND NOTIFICATION TO THE OHIO EPA. 
(a)  Permission. 
(1)  An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(6) and (a)(7) hereof, such applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding: 
A.  The purpose of the proposed burning; 
B.  The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be burned; 
C.  The date or dates when such burning will take place; 
D.  The location of the burning site, including a map showing distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other pertinent landmarks; and 
E.  The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the emissions of air contaminants. 
(3)  Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of Chapter 3745-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(6) hereof, permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set with oral permission of the Ohio EPA. 
(5)  Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the imposition of other sanctions provided by law. 
(6)  The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio fire academy's mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to subsection (a)(1) hereof shall contain information as required in paragraph (a)(2) of this rule, except the information required in subsections (a)(2)C. and (A)(2)D. hereof need not be provided unless it is available at the time of submittal of the application. The academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local air agency at least five working days before each training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. 
(7)  For open burning defined under subsection (d)(2) of Section 1511.03, and paragraph (C)(2) of Rule 3745-19-04 of the Administrative Code, permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with Rule 3745-20-03 of the Ohio Administrative Code. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered working days. It shall be in such form and contain such information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA. 
(2)  Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding: 
A.  The purpose of the proposed burning; 
B.  The nature and quantities of materials to be burned; 
C.  The date or dates when such burning will take place; and 
D.  The location of the burning site. 
(3)  The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the open burning is not allowed under Chapter 3745-19 of the Administrative Code and the Ohio EPA shall notify the applicant to this effect. 
State Law reference- (OAC 3745-19-05) 
1511.05 - OPEN BURNING; RECREATIONAL FIRES; PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES. 
(a)  General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official in accordance with Rule 1301:7-7-01 of the Ohio Fire Code prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
(d)  Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or local air and water quality management authority, provided that all conditions specified in the authorization are followed. 
(e)  Extinguishment Authority. The Fire Code Official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the Fire Department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
(f)  Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure. 
(g)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a structure. 
(2)  The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) where the pile size is three feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
A.  Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
B.  Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
C.  Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
(h)  Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with paragraph (F)(906) of rule 1301:7-7-09 of the Administrative Code with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
State Law reference- (OAC 1301:7-7-03) 
1511.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both. 
CHAPTER 1519 - FIREWORKS[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Manufacturers to comply with building and zoning ordinances, O.R.C.  3743.06(F); Wholesalers to comply with building and zoning ordinances, O.R.C.  3743.19(G); Arrests, seizure of fireworks by certified fire safety inspector, O.R.C.  3743.68; Conflict of Fire Marshal's rules with rules of Ohio Board of Building Standards, O.R.C.  3781.11(D) 

1519.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Beer and intoxicating liquor have the same meanings as in O.R.C.  4301.01. 
    Booby trap means a small tube that has a string protruding from both ends, that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of the string. 
    Cigarette load means a small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette. 
    1.3 G fireworks means display fireworks consistent with regulations of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation "Division 1.3" in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. 
    1.4 G fireworks means consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation "Division 1.4" in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Controlled substance has the same meaning as in O.R.C.  3719.01. 
    Fireworks means any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Section 1519.05. 
    Licensed exhibitor of fireworks or licensed exhibitor means a person licensed pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.50 to 3743.55. 
    Licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed manufacturer means a person licensed pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.02 to 3743.08. 
    Licensed wholesaler of fireworks or licensed wholesaler means a person licensed pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.15 to 3743.21. 
    Novelties and trick noisemakers include the following items: 
(1)  Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user, including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers and snappers; 
(2)  Snakes or glow worms; 
(3)  Smoke devices; 
(4)  Trick matches. 
    Party popper means a small plastic or paper item that contains not more than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition, that is ignited by pulling string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are expelled when the item is ignited. 
    Railroad means any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant. 
    Smoke device means a tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
    Snake or glow worm means a device that consists of a pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns. 
    Snapper means a small, paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand, and that, when dropped, implodes. 
    Trick match means a kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a shower of sparks. 
    Wire sparkler means a sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a non- explosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.01) 
1519.02 - PUBLIC EXHIBITION PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; BOND; RECORDS. 
(a)  A licensed exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition within the Municipality shall apply for approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief and from the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer. 
The required approval shall be evidenced by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the exhibition, the form for which shall be prescribed by the State Fire Marshal. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the Fire Marshal or, if it is available, from the Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of fireworks, the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that, in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. Each applicant shall show the applicant's license as an exhibitor of fireworks to the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer. 
The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the Fire Marshal pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may revoke the permit for noncompliance with the rules. 
(c)  The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall not issue a permit until the applicant pays a permit fee of $25.00 plus any necessary costs of investigation of the applicant and of inspecting the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted. 
Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00, with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and to Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition, or proof of insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000.00 for liability arising from injury, death or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition. The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this subsection. The Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this subsection. 
(d)  (1)  Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the Municipality, and identify the certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer who will be present before, during, and after the exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the Fire Marshal, who shall keep a record of the permits received. A permit is not transferable or assignable. 
(2)  The Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of such Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, shall list the name of the exhibitor, the exhibitor's license number, the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition and the number of the permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition. 
(e)  The governing authority having jurisdiction in the location where an exhibition is to take place shall require that a certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer be present before, during, and after the exhibition, and shall require the certified Fire Safety Inspector, Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this chapter and O.R.C. Ch. 3743. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.54) 
1519.03 - UNLAWFUL CONDUCT BY EXHIBITOR. 
(a)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the Fire Marshal pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Divisions (C) and (D) of that section. 
(b)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Section 1519.02 or if a permit so secured is revoked by the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement official or a designee of such Police Chief or other similar law enforcement official pursuant to that section. 
(c)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with O.R.C.  3743.54 and 3743.55. 
(d)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted. 
(e)  No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee is registered with the Fire Marshal under O.R.C.  3743.56. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.64) 
1519.04 - POSSESSION, SALE OR DISCHARGE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  No person shall possess fireworks in this Municipality or shall possess for sale or sell fireworks in this Municipality, except a licensed manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.02-3743.08, a licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.15-3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.40, an out-of-state resident as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.44, a resident of this state as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by O.R.C.  3743.50-3743.55 and Section 1519.02 and except as provided in Section 1519.05. 
(b)  Except as provided in Section 1519.05 and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to O.R.C.  3743.50-3743.55 and Section 1519.02, no person shall discharge, ignite or explode any fireworks in this Municipality. 
(c)  No person shall use in a theater or public hall, what is technically known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and sulphur. 
(d)  No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way disruptive to the safe operation of the premises. 
(e)  No person, other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping permit holder, shall possess 1.3 G fireworks. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.65) 
1519.05 - APPLICATION. 
    This chapter does not prohibit or apply to the following: 
(a)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation or highway use; 
(b)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads; 
(c)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with athletics as signals or for ceremonial purposes; 
(d)  The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use by, or sale to the Armed Forces of the United States and the militia of this State of pyrotechnic devices; 
(e)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps; 
(f)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; 
(g)  The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of wire sparklers. 
(h)  The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge, and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges, provided that the exhibition complies with all of following: 
(1)  No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition; 
(2)  The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200 feet; 
(3)  The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.80) 
1519.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense and shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than six months or both. 
State Law reference- (O.R.C.  3743.99(C)) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - CODIFIED ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those codified ordinances of the City of Powell adopted since August, 1949. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the preceding tables. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section 19  8- 8-49 905.01-905.05 92  8-11-64 731.01 126 11-13-69 921.01 167 10- 7-75 721.01-721.09, 721.99 Res. 79-8  7- 3-79 121.01 81-14 10- 6-81 509.08 84-33  9- 4-84 505.15 84-43  3- 5-85 557.01 86-18  4- 8-86 155.02 86-28  7- 1-86 1101.01-1101.04, 1104.99 1103.01-1103.20, 1103.99 1105.01-1105.10, 1105.99 1107.01-1107.11, 1107.99 1109.01-1109.14, 1109.99 1113.01-1113.08, 1113.99 1115.01-1115.07, 1115.99 86-31  6- 3-86 Ch. 909(ed. note) 87-03  3-17-87 1101.03, 1101.04 1103.01, 1103.03 1103.10, 1103.20 1105.03, 1105.05 1105.07, 1105.10 1107.04-1107.06, 1107.08 1109.01, 1113.03(b)(5) 1113.05(c), 1115.05(c) 87-13  6-16-87 185.01(b)-(e) 185.03 87-25  9-22-87 151.01-151.03 87-26 10-20-87 1325.01-1325.10, 1325.99 1327.01-1327.09, 1327.99 1329.01-1329.13, 1329.99 1331.01-1331.04, 1331.99 1333.01-1333.08, 1333.99 1335.01-1335.05, 1335.99 1337.01 1337.02(b)-1337.18 1337.99 1339.01-1339.11, 1339.99 1341.01-1341.08, 1341.99 87-28 11-17-87 185.01(a), 185.04, 185.05 88-19  8-24-88 1105.04, 1105.06 1107.09(a), (b), (e), 1109.14 1113.03, 1113.04 89-15  7- 5-89 155.01 89-18  7-18-89 181.01-181.14, 181.99 89-20  7- 5-89 521.11 90-04  1-24-90 1315.01 90-05  1-24-90 1319.01, 1319.02 90-18  3-20-90 951.01-951.06, 951.99 90-24  7- 5-90 1329.01(e) 90-25  7- 5-90 1309.01-1309.08, 1309.99 90-35  8- 7-90 1337.02(a) 91-01  2- 5-91 1121.01-1121.13, 1123.01 1125.01-1125.13 1127.01-1127.14 1129.01-1129.20 1131.01-1131.14 1133.01-1133.16 1135.01-1135.21 1141.01-1141.08 1143.01-1143.20 1145.01-1145.33 1147.01-1147.12 1149.01-1149.11 1151.01-1151.12 91-40 10- 1-91 1127.06, 1127.14 1129.02, 1129.14 1129.19, 1131.04 1131.08, 1131.09 1131.11, 1135.02 1141.02, 1141.08 1143.07, 1143.09 1143.11 1143.12-1143.15 1145.33, 1147.12 91-54 11-19-91 Part Eleven Appendices 91-61 11-19-91 549.08 92-01  2-18-92 1143.09, 1143.12 1143.13, 1143.30 1145.28, 1145.29 1149.05 92-03  2-11-92 153.01-153.03 92-18  6-16-92 711.01-711.09, 711.99 92-21  6-16-92 1111.01-1111.11, 1111.99 92-51 11-28-92 181.07, 181.13(a) 93-15  4-14-93 955.01-955.18, 955.99 93-59 12- 1-93 1305.01-1305.05 94-28  8-16-94 1143.13 Adopting Ordinance 101.01-101.08, 101.99 139.01, 185.02 301.01-301.52 303.01-303.11, 303.99 305.01-305.05 311.01-311.03, 311.99 313.01-313.10, 313.99 331.01-331.43, 331.99 333.01-333.09, 333.99 335.01-335.14, 335.99 337.01-337.29, 337.99 339.01-339.11 341.01-341.06, 341.99 351.01-351.13 371.01-371.11 373.01-373.10 375.01-375.07, 375.99 501.01-501.12, 501.99 505.01-505.14 509.01-509.07 513.01-513.13, 513.99 517.01-517.09 521.01-521.10 525.01-525.14 529.01-529.08 533.01-533.15 537.01-537.18 541.01-541.09 545.01-545.20 549.01-549.07, 549.09 553.01-553.03 557.02-557.04, 557.99 905.99 1311.01-1311.09, 1311.99 1501.01-1501.12, 1501.99 1511.01-1511.05, 1511.99 1519.01-1519.05, 1519.99 95-35 10- 4-94 181.13(a) 181.15, 181.16 95-06  2-21-95 1323.01-1323.16 1323.99 95-09  3- 7-95 153.01 95-18  6- 6-95 133.01 96-02  2- 6-96 1143.18(b), 1143.21 96-05  1-16-96 153.01-153.03 96-06  1-16-96 133.01(d) 96-10  3-19-96 1315.01 96-11  2-20-96 151.01-151.03 96-19  4- 2-96 155.02 96-34  6-18-96 303.99, 333.07 335.07, 341.01 351.04, 513.08 525.01, 525.02 525.05, 525.10 525.15, 529.01 529.02, 529.03 529.04, 529.06 529.07, 537.07 537.14, 537.15 541.06 97-11  4- 1-97 505.011 97-12  3-24-97 333.03, 333.10 333.99, 337.99 509.011, 509.03 513.01-513.06, 513.08 513.13, 513.99 517.05, 517.06 525.01, 525.02 525.05, 525.08, 525.09 533.01, 533.02 533.04, 533.07 533.091, 533.12, 533.14 537.01-537.06 537.15, 537.17 541.02, 545.03 545.05-545.10 545.13-545.15 545.17-545.19 549.02 97-14  4- 1-97 505.01 97-16  4- 1-97 1140.01-1140.04 97-29  6-17-97 1145.28(d) 97-46 12- 2-97 1153.01-1153.11, 1153.99 97-50 10- 7-97 557.01-557.04 97-51 12- 2-97 1501.01, 1501.02 98-06  3- 3-98 153.01 98-10  4- 7-98 301.27 303.041 331.15, 331.21 331.39, 331.99 335.09, 335.11 337.10, 337.16 337.22, 337.27 501.01 509.06, 509.07 513.01, 513.03, 513.07 513.10, 513.11 517.02 525.08, 525.09 529.07 533.06 537.03, 537.10 537.12, 537.14, 537.15 545.01, 545.07 549.07, 549.10 1519.01-1519.05 98-16  7- 7-98 153.04 98-25  8- 4-98 1123.01 1135.18 1143.06, 1143.07, 1143.15 1145.08, 1145.22 1145.27, 1145.33 1147.02, 1147.08 1147.12 1149.08 1151.11 98-42 10- 6-98 1131.04(m) 1131.12 1143.11(n) 98-54 10-20-98 1315.01 99-05  2-16-99 1305.01-1305.05 99-11  3- 2-99 335.03, 335.99 339.07 341.02 373.11 513.01, 513.03 513.04, 513.09 513.10, 513.12 525.01, 525.11 533.01, 537.03 537.15, 541.07 545.05, 545.18 99-29  6-15-99 147.01 99-30  6-15-99 351.99 99-31  6-15-99 351.14 99-43  9-21-99 1155.01-1155.05 99-46  9- 7-99 1145.29, 1145.33.1 99-47 10- 5-99 1151.01-1151.12 99-50 10-19-99 1135.02(b) 99-58 12-21-99 121.01 99-61 12-21-99 131.01 99-84  1- 4-00 1329.07 00-02  3- 7-00 331.35, 331.38 333.031 335.031, 335.07 335.99 351.04 375.01-375.08 501.01, 501.05 509.03 537.03, 537.051, 537.10 541.07 545.01, 545.02 545.05, 545.06 545.08, 545.10 545.14, 545.15 545.18, 545.21 549.10 00-06  4-18-00 1143.22 00-21  6- 6-00 1329.08 01-03  2-20-01 303.082, 303.083 333.01, 333.99 335.07, 335.09 337.02, 337.18 337.24, 337.30 337.99 339.03 375.03 501.04, 501.07, 501.09 505.14 509.03, 509.05 513.03, 513.05 513.06, 513.08 513.12 525.03 525.07, 525.12 529.07 533.03, 533.06 537.02, 537.051 537.07 553.01, 553.011 01-04  3-20-01 1143.25 01-06  2- 6-01 155.03 01-12  3- 6-01 181.09 181.17-181.19 01-26  6-19-01 1145.33.2 Res. 01-28  5-15-01 155.04 01-34  6-19-01 1315.01 01-57 11- 6-01 1147.14 01-58 11- 6-01 1145.06 01-59 11- 6-01 1147.13 01-60 11- 6-01 1147.11(b) 01-75 12-18-01 1337.02(a) 01-76 12-18-01 549.08(b) 2002-09  3- 5-02 301.20, 335.08 337.27, 337.99 375.08, 501.06 509.03, 509.05 513.01, 513.12 525.01, 525.02 525.08, 525.15 525.16, 529.07 533.05, 537.03 537.05, 537.051 537.06, 537.16 537.17, 537.18 549.07, 1519.02, 1519.03 2002-36  8- 6-02 301.041, 337.37 2002-63  1- 7-03 1147.14 2003-1  2- 4-03 1143.21 2003-2  2- 4-03 1143.15(a), 1143.16(a) 2003-10  3- 4-03 301.51, 371.12 371.99, 501.01 501.99, 509.06 509.07, 513.01 525.08, 529.01 529.02, 529.021 529.07, 533.01 533.02, 533.04 533.05, 537.14 537.16, 545.21 1311.01-1311.09, 1311.99 2003-11  4- 8-03 905.01-905.11 2003-13  4- 8-03       Rpld 905.01-905.05 2003-31  5-20-03 521.11 2003-52  9-16-03 133.02 2004-06  2-17-04 1337.19 2004-14  3-23-04 521.12 2004-16  3-16-04 711.01-711.09 2004-32  4-20-04 153.01 2004-33  5-18-04 1109.14, 1111.054 1111.07, 1123.01, 1145.25 2004-49  8- 3-04 522.01-522.08, 522.99 2004-54  8-17-04 133.02 2004-56  8- 3-04       Rpld 521.10 2004-69 12- 7-04 1143.09(a), (c)(2) 1147.15 2004-62 11- 3-04 955.01-955.18, 955.99 2005-04  2-15-05 1151.05(d) 2005-08  2-15-05 301.201, 303.08 333.01, 333.02 333.07, 335.01 335.03, 337.28 501.04, 501.99 509.02, 505.071 509.05, 513.01 513.06, 529.03 529.05, 529.07 537.02, 537.021 541.04, 541.05 549.01, 549.02 549.04, 549.10 2005-11  3-15-05 1127.09, 1127.10 1129.06, 1129.07 1131.09, 1131.11, 1143.11 2005-12  3-15-05 1133.06, 1133.10 2005-20  6- 7-05 1141.02, 1143.08 1143.17 1143.16.1-1143.18       Rpld 1143.05-1143.07, 1143.18-1143.28 2005-21  5- 4-05 1105.10 1115.01-1115.07, 1115.99 2005-22  5-17-05 715.01-715.09, 715.99 2005-29  6- 7-05 1135.03, 1135.04 2005-35  6-21-05 185.01-185.06 2005-37  8- 2-05 715.01-715.11, 715.99 2005-39  8-16-05 1147.12 2005-52 10- 4-05       Rpld 305.03 2006-12  3- 7-06 313.11, 331.38 331.40, 337.27 341.01, 341.02 341.03, 341.05 375.01, 501.05 517.01, 517.06 517.08, 517.09 517.14, 525.02 525.15, 533.07 537.17, 545.01 545.05, 545.06 545.09, 545.21 1311.01, 1311.03 1311.04, 1311.09 2006-32  6- 6-06 133.03 2006-60 10-17-06 953.01-953.14 2007-01  1-16-07 1111.052(c) 1111.054(f) 2007-02  1-16-07 906.01, 906.02, 906.99 2007-05  2-12-07 331.01, 331.07 331.14, 333.01 333.04, 337.29 373.01, 373.02 373.05-373.07 501.06, 513.01 513.03, 513.04 513.08, 513.12 513.14, 525.15 525.17, 529.02 529.07, 529.08 533.01, 533.06 537.07, 541.11 545.01, 545.05, 549.11 2007-17  3-20-07 333.03.2 2007-37  8- 7-07 181.01-181.19 2007-45  9-18-07 505.11 2008-01  1-15-08 1145.06, 1145.22 2008-02  2- 5-08 301.20, 333.01 333.08, 335.03 335.031, 337.10 337.18, 337.26 339.05, 501.01 513.12, 517.01 517.15, 525.02 525.03, 525.10 533.01, 533.07 537.02, 537.03 537.051, 537.08 537.16, 537.17 549.02, 549.04 2008-09  4- 1-08 741.01 2008-12  5- 6-08 557.04 2008-17  6- 3-08 1115.03 2008-20  8-19-08 1151.01-1151.15, 1151.99 2008-23  8-19-08 1147.16 2008-27 10- 7-08 721.01-721.10, 721.99 2009-07  3- 3-09 301.19, 333.01 335.05, 335.072 337.26, 339.11 373.02, 501.06 509.06, 513.01 513.03, 525.02 529.07, 549.01 549.02, 549.04 1511.01, 1511.03 1511.04, 1511.05 2009-08  3-17-09 905.01-905.11 2009-11  4- 7-09 1305.01-1305.09 2009-12  4- 7-09       Rpld 1147.16 2009-13  4- 7-09 1147.15 2009-26 10-20-09 1145.22 2009-27 11- 4-09 1143.09 2010-03  2-16-10 301.04, 301.321 303.082, 303.10 331.38, 333.01 333.03, 333.031 335.01, 335.02 335.031, 335.07 335.072, 335.10 337.02-337.06 337.08 337.10-337.17 337.19-337.22 337.24, 337.26 337.27, 341.03 351.04, 375.05 525.02, 525.03 525.05, 533.06 537.02, 537.03 537.14, 537.15 541.05, 545.01 545.05, 549.01 549.02, 549.04 549.07 2010-38  9-21-10 1127.06 2010-60 12-21-10 905.01 2011-02  2- 1-11 333.01, 333.031 335.01, 335.02 335.07, 335.072 335.10, 335.12 335.13, 337.28 337.29, 501.99 517.01, 517.02 517.06, 529.07 537.10, 537.11 537.14, 537.15 Ch. 1311 1519.04 2011-03  3-15-11 1109.14, 1111.052 1111.054, 1111.07 2011-05  3-15-11 906.01, 906.03 2011-24 11- 1-11 1331.01-1331.05, 1331.99 2012-03  2- 7-12 333.01, 335.01 335.02 335.05-335.074 335.12-335.14 337.22, 351.04 373.02, 501.01 501.02, 501.13 501.99, 509.06 509.07, 513.03 517.05, 525.01 525.02, 529.07 537.10, 537.12 541.02, 545.02 545.04, 545.05 545.07-545.10 545.13-545.15 545.17, 545.18, 549.04 2012-16  7-17-12 951.06 2012-35 10-16-12 522.021 2012-40 11-20-12 121.02, 145.01 2013-10  2- 5-13 301.031, 301.161 301.17, 301.181 301.26, 301.361 301.45-301.47 303.01, 303.041 303.99 313.03-313.06 331.12, 333.11 335.032, 335.07 335.072, 335.074 337.01, 337.09 337.18, 337.23 337.29, 339.01 339.03, 339.06 339.07, 339.08 341.05, 513.12 513.121, 517.01 517.02 517.05-517.11 517.13, 517.15 529.021, 529.04 529.07, 533.08 533.09, 545.05 549.10, 1511.05 2013-42  9- 3-13 549.08 2013-43  9- 3-13 339.02 2014-04  1-21-14 301.04, 313.03 333.03, 333.11 335.032, 339.01 339.03, 341.01 341.03, 351.04, 373.02, 501.01 501.11, 505.001 505.13, 505.14 513.01, 513.03 517.01, 517.02 525.02, 537.03 537.12, 545.01 545.05, 545.18 549.01, 549.02, 549.04 2015-10  3-17-15 301.161, 301.162 333.01, 333.03 333.031, 337.16 337.17, 339.01 351.03, 351.04 505.071, 521.08 525.01, 525.05 529.01, 529.07 533.09, 533.14 537.03, 537.05 537.051, 537.06 537.12, 537.16 537.17, 545.01 545.02, 545.05 545.15, 553.03 1511.01, 1511.03 1511.04 2015-29  8-18-15 1151.01-1151.15, 1151.99 2015-48 10-20-15       Rpld 181.02(b)(6) 2015-49 10-20-15 182.01-182.21 182.97, 182.98, 182.99 2016-18  6- 7-16 1339.01-1339.04 1339.07       Rpld 1339.08       Rnbd 1339.09-1339.11       as 1339.08-1339.10       Added 1339.11 2016-56 11-15-16 182.051, 182.091 2017-24  6-20-17 537.16 2017-25  6-20-17       Added 751.01, 751.02, 751.99 2017-35  8-15-17       Added 1143.31 2017-45  9-19-17       Rpld 1311.01-1311.11 , 1311.99       Added 1311.01, 1311.02, 1311.04, 1311.05, 1311.08, 1311.99 1315.01       Rpld 1319.01, 1319.02 1323.01-1323.16, 1323.99       Rpld 1325.01-1325.10, 1325.99       Added 1325.01-1325.03 1325.05-1325.10, 1325.99       Rpld 1327.01-1327.09, 1327.99       Added 1327.01-1327.09, 1327.99       Rpld 1329.01-1329.13, 1329.99       Added 1329.01-1329.13, 1329.99 1331.01-1331.05, 1331.99       Rpld 1333.01-1333.08, 1333.99       Rpld 1335.01-1335.05, 1335.99       Added 1335.02, 1335.04, 1335.99       Rpld 1337.01-1337.19, 1337.99       Added 1337.01-1337.03 1337.11, 1337.12 1337.15-1337.19, 1337.99       Rpld 1339.01-1339.11, 1339.99       Added 1339.01-1339.11, 1339.99 1341.01-1341.08, 1341.99 2017-52 10-17-17       Added 513.15       Added 549.12 513.11(d)       Added 549.13 513.05(d) 513.121(g) 541.01 513.08(d) 513.13(State Law Reference) 537.17 513.07 533.09 501.99(State Law Reference) 513.05(d) 513.12(g) 537.10 513.06(d) 525.15 513.02(State Law Reference) 501.06(i) 537.051 537.02(State Law Reference) 537.15(b)(3), (d), (e) 2017-53 11- 8-17       Added 335.17-335.33 355.13 373.02 331.21 335.19 371.12(e) 335.12 301.04 301.05 301.06 301.10 301.19 301.201 301.251 301.45 301.51 313.09       Added 335.16 375.04 331.40(State Law Reference)       Added 335.15 351.07 375.01 335.11(State Law Reference) 303.04(d) 335.09 331.03 2017-60 12-19-17 1101.02 1103.10 1105.04-1105.06 1105.09 1105.10       Added 1107.035 1107.04-1107.10 1109.04 1109.06-1109.08 1109.11 1111.03 1111.04 1111.051-1111.054 1111.06-1111.09 1111.11 1113.03 1113.07 1121.02       Added 1121.025 1121.03 1121.05 1121.07       Added 1121.085 1123.01 1127.06 1127.09 1127.10 1129.02 1129.06 1129.07 1131.04       Rpld 1131.07       Rnbd 1131.08-1131.14       as 1131.07-1131.13 1133.05 1133.07 1133.08 1133.14       Rpld 1135.06 1141.02       Rpld 1141.08       Rpld 1143.03       Dltd 1143.03-1143.07 1143.08-1143.11 1143.13-1143.16 1143.16.2 1143.18       Dltd 1143.19-1143.28 1143.29 1145.03 1145.05 1145.12 1145.16 1145.19 1145.22 1145.24-1145.28 1145.30 1145.34 1147.04 1147.12 1147.15 1147.16 1149.09       Rpld 1149.10 1151.04 1155.03 2018-10  2-23-18       Added 182.60-182.75 2018-24  6-19-18 1315.01 2018-40  9- 4-18 181.12(d)       Added 182.096(b)(4) 2018-49 11- 7-18       Added 537.19 2018-50 11- 7-18       Added 331.45, 331.46       Added 339.12 301.22 301.51  
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES 
Editor's note- The Codified Ordinances of Powell cover all ordinances of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent ordinances are set forth in full in the Codified Ordinances. 
 References must be made frequently to many special ordinances, particularly those related to property, such as dedications, vacating, easements, purchase, sale, etc. In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances are listed. These tables list ordinances chronologically by subject, and include both a citation to and a brief description of each ordinance. 
    
TABLE A Franchises TABLE B Easements TABLE C Vacating Streets and Alleys TABLE D Dedication and Plat Approval TABLE E Acquisition and Disposal of Real 
Property TABLE F Lease of Real Property TABLE G Street Grade Levels and Curb Lines TABLE H Annexation and Detachment of 
Territory TABLE I Zoning Map Changes  
TABLE A - FRANCHISES 
Ord. No. Date Description 10  1-26-48 Ohio Public Service Company electrical contract. 13  1-26-48 Ohio Public Service Company for street lighting. 29  1- 6-53 Columbus and Southern Ohio Electric Company for street lighting. 30  1- 6-53 Fixes prices charged by Columbus and Southern Ohio Electric Company. 49  1- 8-58 Fixes prices charged by Columbus and Southern Ohio Electric Company, and repealing Ord. 30. 81  4- 2-63 Columbus and Southern Ohio Electric Company for street lighting. 110  5- 9-68 Columbus and Southern Ohio Electric Company for street lighting. 78-2  8- 1-78 Columbus and Southern Electric Company for street lighting. 85-21  6-16-85 Powell Cable for cable TV for 15 years. 85-22  9-10-85 Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., for natural gas for 15 years. Res. 86-20 12-16-86 Approves the change of ownership of cable television franchise from Total Cable and Powell Cable to Warner Cable Communications, Inc. 87-23  7-21-87 Amends fee for cable TV service. 91-67  1-21-92 Authorizes transfer of existing cable TV franchise either directly or through one or more wholly-owned subsidiaries of Time Warner. 03-56 10-21-03 Grants a non-exclusive cable communications franchise to Time Warner Entertainment Co.  
TABLE B - EASEMENTS 
Ord. No. Date Description 87-14  6-16-87 Narrowing certain easements and vacating others on the plat of Olentangy Ridge No. 2. 87-17  6-16-87 For sanitary sewers. Res. 89-26 11- 6-89 Sanitary sewer easements. 91-21  5- 7-91 To Del-Co Water Co., Inc., for future use. 91-39  8-20-91 To Columbus Southern Power Co. for future use. 91-47 9-17-91 To Columbus Southern Power Co. for electric service to the Municipal Service Center. 93-12  3- 2-93 Conveys right-of-way easement to Ohio Bell Telephone Co. 94-20  6- 7-94 Releases any claim to a portion of a platted drainage easement abutting Lot 659. 96-18  4- 2-96 Authorizes the conveyance of a right of way easement to the Ohio Bell Co. 96-25  5- 7-96 Authorizes the conveyance of a right of way easement to the Ohio Bell Co. 96-28  5-21-96 Conveys a right of way easement to the Columbus Southern Power Co. 97-63  1-20-98 Authorizes the conveyance of an easement to complete agreements regarding the Lakes of Powell. 98-01  2-18-98 Grants an easement for the installation of a sanitary sewer on Municipal property to the Delaware County Board of Commissioners. 98-36  7- 7-98 Vacates a portion of easements within John D. Wolf Commerce Park Section 1. 98-47 10- 6-98 Grants easements for sewer purposes to the Delaware County Commissioners affecting portion of the South Park, located within the Municipality. 98-69 12-15-98 Authorizes the conveyance of a right of way easement to the American Electric Power Co. 99-22  5- 4-99 Releases any and all rights to a 0.49 square foot portion of an easement on Lot 2341. 00-04  2-15-00 Authorizes the conveyance of an easement and right of way to the Columbus Southern Power Co. over a portion of a 0.46 acre tract owned by the City. 00-23  7-18-00 Grants easements for sewers purposes to the Delaware County Commissioners affecting a portion of the South Park and Murphy Parkway. 01-29  6-19-01 Grants an easement to M/I Schottenstein Homes, Inc. dba The Lakes of Powell Homeowners' Association, Inc., for the installation of an entry feature and landscaping on Municipal property at the intersection of Salisbury Drive and Presidential Parkway. 02-11  3-19-02 Grants an easement to the Falcon Ridge Homeowners' Association for the installation of an entry feature and landscaping at the intersection at Bennett Parkway and East Olentangy St. 02-27  6-18-02 Grants an easement to VJP Ltd. and Vincent Margello for the installation of Commercial Display Signs on Village Pointe Drive. 02-60 12- 3-02 Releasing the claim to a portion of a platted utility easement on Lot 4291, Golf Village Section 7, Phase A. 02-61 12- 3-02 Releasing the claim to a portion of a platted drainage easement on Lot 4268, Golf Village Section 7, Phase A. 03-59 10-7-03 Grants an easement to Del-Co Water Co. affecting a portion of the Powell Village Green. 04-39  6- 1-04 Grants an easement for water services to Del-Co Water Co., affecting a portion of City property known as Library Park. 04-41  6-15-04 Grants an easement for a guy wire stabilization for a utility pole to American Electric Power. 05-45  9-12-05 Authorizes the conveyance of an easement to Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for the installation and repair of pipelines. 06-64 10- 3-06 Accepts easements from Delaware Realty and Properties Limited and Delaware Land and Cattle Co. LLC regarding the premises at 37 South Liberty St. 07-44  8-21-07 Vacates an unrecorded 0.080 acre easement located on Lot 332. 07-48  9- 4-07 Vacates a 10 foot permanent public pathway easement located on Lots 27 and 28. 12-34  9- 4-12 Vacates a 180 square foot portion of an easement, located on Lot 313 of the Retreat Section 5, of record in Plat Book Volume 14, Page 37, in the Recorder's Office, Delaware County. 2013-46 10- 1-13 Vacates a sanitary sewer easement, located on real property formerly owned by Fiori Village Communities, LLC. 2014-20  4-15-14 Grants a storm sewer easement to Carl Gioffre Investments, LLC over a portion of Village Green within the City. 2014-29  6- 3-14 Grants a storm sewer easement to Carl Gioffre Investments LLC over a portion of Village Green within the City. 2015-08  3- 3-15 Vacates a portion of a roadway easement, located on Outlot No. 1 on the plat of Powell, of record in Plat Book Volume 2, Page 268, in the Delaware County, Ohio Recorder's Office. 2015-63 12-15-15 Grants an easement and right-of-way to American Electric Power over a portion of land adjacent to Liberty St. south of the CSX Railroad in conjunction with AEP's relocation associated with Murphy Parkway. 2016-68 12-20-16 Vacates a portion of a drainage easement and a portion of a landscape buffer easement, located on real property of record in Plat Cabinet 2, Slides 542-542A, in the Recorder's Office, Delaware County, being Lot 1978, John D. Wolf Commerce Park Section 2. 2017-04  2- 7-17 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a burial easement and cemetery access agreement with Jill King for the purpose of installing a mausoleum upon a plot containing 81 square feet, more or less, at the Powell Cemetery located at 78 North Liberty Street. 2017-33  7- 5-17 Grants a waterline easement for water service to Del-Co Water Company, Inc. over a portion of the Park at Seldom. 2018-16  4- 2-18 Granting an easement for sewer purposes to the Delaware County Commissioners affecting a portion of Seldom Seen Park located within the City of Powell. 2019-02  1-15-19 Grants an easement and right-of-way to Ohio Power Company for underground power for the Park at Seldom Seen Road. 2019-05  2- 5-19 Approving the easement vacation plat for Golf Village North Revised and the re-plat of Lots 5140 through 5148 Gold Village North Commercial Revised for the property located at 3315 Royal Belfast Boulevard.  
TABLE C-VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Ord. No. Date Description 157 12- 3-74 A portion of Hall St. 89-03  2- 7-89 An east-west alley directly north of 119 N. Liberty St. 89-04  2- 7-89 A north-south alley directly west of 119 N. Liberty St.  
TABLE D-DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL 
Ord. No. Date Description 55  8-16-58 Approves the Don-Lu Subdivision. 82  4- 2-63 Approves the Don-Lu Subdivision extension. 83  6- 4-63 Accepts dedication of West Case Ave. Res. 84 11-12-74 Approves Section 1 of the Retreat, plat only. Res. 78-1  1- 2-79 Plat of Section IV of the Retreat Subdivision, with modifications. Res. 78-2  1- 2-79 Plat of Section V of the Retreat Subdivision. Res. 79-2  2- 6-79 Final plat of Huffman Subdivsion. Res. 79-7  6- 5-79 Approves the recording of plat of Huffman Subdivison. Res. 79-9  8- 7-79 Plat of Olentangy Ridge, Section No. 1. Res. 79-10  8- 7-79 Plat of Olentangy Ridge, Section No. 2. 81-13  7- 7-81 A parcel of land containing a road known as Fox Run in Section 1-A of the Retreat subdivision. 81-17 11- 3-81 Plat plans for Olentangy Ridge Sections 1 and 2. 84-38  9- 4-84 Final plat of Retreat at Cardinal Hill subdivision. 85-18  6-20-85 Plat of Olentangy Ridge Section 4. Res. 85-04  9-10-85 Accepts Huffman Subdivision No. 2. 86-22  4- 8-86 Final plat of Bartholomew Run. 86-23  4- 8-86 Plat of Olentangy Ridge Section 5. 86-27  5-12-86 Final plat of Phase 1 of Bartholomew Run. 86-30  6- 3-86 Final plat of Industrial Park. 86-42  9- 9-86 Plat of Olentangy Ridge Section 2. 86-43 10-15-86 Final plat of Huffman Subdivision No. 3. 86-46 10-21-86 Final plat for the Chase subdivision. 86-46A 11-11-86 Accepts streets and storm drainage systems in Cardinal Hill. 86-47 11-11-86 Accepts streets and storm drainage systems in Retreat No. 4. 87-01  1-22-87 Plat of Olentangy Ridge Section 6. 87-05  6-16-87 Plat of Olentangy Ridge Section 7. 87-09  4- 7-87 Plat of Bartholomew Run Section 2. 87-20  6-16-87 Plat of Deer Run subdivision. 87-22  7- 7-87 Accepts Thornbury Lane in the Chase subdivision. 88-07  3- 1-88 Plat of Bartholomew Run Section 3. 88-20  7- 5-88 Plat of Liberty Hills Section 1. 88-34 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in the Chase subdivision. 88-35 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 1. 88-36 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 2. 88-37 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 3. 88-39 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 5. 88-40 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 6. 88-41 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 7. 88-42 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Bartholomew Run 1. 88-43 12- 6-88 Accepts improvements in Bartholomew Run 2. 89-37  1- 2-90 An unnamed stub road north of the intersection of Retreat Lane North and Partridge Bend. 90-19  4- 3-90 Accepts improvements in Deer Run. 90-20  4- 3-90 Accepts improvements in Liberty Hills Section 1. 90-32  7- 5-90 Rpld. Ord. 88-39. 90-33  7- 5-90 Rpld. Ord. 88-41 91-07  2- 5-91 Plat of the John D. Wolf Commerce Park, Section 1. 91-09  3-19-91 Plan for the John D. Wolf Commerce Park Section 1, Lots 2 and 3. 91-11  4-16-91 Plan for Liberty Hills Section 2. 91-12  4-16-91 Plat of Liberty Hills Section 2. 91-29  7-16-91 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 5. 91-30  7-16-91 Accepts improvements in Olentangy Ridge Section 7. 91-42  9-17-91 Final development plan for Grandshire Subdivision Phase I. 91-43  9-17-91 Plat for Grandshire Subdivision Phase I. 91-45  9-17-91 Accepts improvements in Liberty Hills Phase II. 91-58 11-19-91 Plat for the Woods of Sawmill. 92-31  7-21-92 Plat for Falcon Ridge Section I. 92-32  8- 4-92 Accepts improvements in Grandshire Section 1. 92-40 8-18-92 Plat for Powell Place Phase I. 92-47 10-20-92 Plat for Grandshire Section 2. 92-48 12- 1-92 Accepts improvements in Grandshire Section 2. 93-02  1-19-93 Revised plat for the Woods of Sawmill. 93-22  4-14-93 Approves the plat for Grandshire Subdivision Section 3. 93-23  4-14-93 Approves the plat for Falcon Ridge Subdivision Section 2. 93-42  7-20-93 Approves plat for Falcon Ridge Subdivision Section 3. 93-44  7-20-93 Approves plat for Liberty Ridge Subdivision Phase I. 93-45  7-20-93 Approves plat for Powell Place Phase 2. 93-49  8-17-93 Approves plat for Grandshire Subdivision Section 4. 94-08  2- 1-94 Approves plat for the dedication of Village Park Drive. 94-16  6-21-94 Approves plat for Liberty Ridge Subdivision Phase II. 95-28  6-20-95 Accepts the plat of the John D. Wolf Commerce Park, Phase 2. 95-34  9-5-95 Accepts all public improvements upon plat of Powell Place Phase One. 95-35  9-5-95 Accepts all public improvements upon plat of Falcon Ridge Subdivision Section 1. 95-36  9-5-95 Accepts all public improvements upon plat of Grandshire Subdivision Section 3. 95-39  9-19-95 Conditionally accepts improvements upon plat of Falcon Ridge Subdivision, Section 4. 95-45 11-21-95 Conditionally accepts public improvements within the plat of Ashmoore Section 1. 95-46 11-21-95 Accepts the public improvements upon plat of Powell Place Subdivision, Phase II. 96-13  4- 2-96 Approves the plat for Grandshire, Section 5. 96-27  6- 5-96 Approves the plat for Ashmore, Section 2. 96-50  9-17-96 Conditionally accepts public improvements upon Grandshire Subdivision, Section 5. 96-51  9-17-96 Conditionally accepts public improvements in Liberty Ridge Phase II Subdivision plat. 96-56 11- 5-96 Conditionally accepts public improvements in Ashmore, Section 2 Subdivision plat. 97-20  5- 6-97 Approves the plat for Lakes of Powell, Section 1. 97-27  6- 3-97 Approves the subdivision plat for Ashmoure, Section 3. 97-41  8- 5-97 Accepts the public improvements in the Falcon Ridge Section 2 Subdivision as delineated upon the plat thereof. 97-42  8- 5-97 Accepts the public improvements in the Falcon Ridge Section 3 Subdivision as delineated upon the plat thereof. 97-48  9-16-97 Approves the subdivision plat for Robinson Subdivision. 97-62 12-16-97 Approves an amendment to the plat of John D. Wolf Commerce Park Section 2. 98-04  2-17-98 Approves the subdivision plat for Chambers Glen Subdivision. 98-05  2-17-98 Approves the subdivision plat for Lakes of Powell Section 2. 98-35  7- 7-98 Approves the subdivision plat for Lakes of Powell Sections 3 and 4. 98-37  7- 7-98 Approves the amended subdivision plat for the John D. Wolf Commerce Park Section 1. 98-52 10- 6-98 Approves the plat for Village Pointe Shopping Center. 98-53 10-20-98 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in the Lakes of Powell Section 3 Subdivision. 98-60 12- 1-98 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in the Ashmoore, Phase 3 Subdivision. 98-61 11-17-98 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in the Lakes of Powell, Section 4 Subdivision. 98-66 12-1-98 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in Clairedan Drive. 99-06  2-16-99 Approves the Subdivision Plat for Liberty Street Business Park. 99-08  3- 2-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Lakes of Powell Section 1 Subdivision. 99-09  3- 2-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Powell Place Phase 3 Subdivision. 99-12  3- 2-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Lakes of Powell Section 2 Subdivision. 99-14  5- 4-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Woods of Sawmill Subdivsion. 99-15  3-16-99 Approves the subdivision plat for Middlebury Estates Subdivision. 99-24  6-15-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Ashmoore Section 2 Subdivision. 99-25  6-15-99 Accepts the public improvements in the Falcon Ridge Section 4 Subdivision. 99-26  6-15-99 Accepts the public improvements of Clairedan Drive. 99-32  6-15-99 Accepts the public improvements of Clairedan Drive as the same is numbered and delineated upon the plat thereof recorded in Cabinet 1, Slides 771-771A Delaware County, Ohio Records. 99-33  6- 1-99 Ratifies certain agreements with Louis and Doris Huffman regarding dedication property for rights of way; vacating other portions of existing right of way. 99-40  7- 6-99 Dedication of 0.061 acres, more or less, for the right of way of Salisbury Drive. 99-52 10- 5-99 Amends Ord. 99-33 to correct a surveyor's error. 99-56 12- 7-99 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in the Middlebury Estates Subdivision. 00-07  3-21-00 Approves the subdivision plat for Lakes of Powell, Section 5 Subdivision. 00-34 10-17-00 Conditionally accepts the public improvements in the Lakes of Powell Section 5 Subdivision. 01-13  4-10-01 Approves the subdivision plat for Lake of Powell, Section 6, Part 1. 01-21  5- 1-01 Approves the subdivision plat for Murphy's Park Subdivision, Section 1. 01-22  5- 1-01 Approves the subdivision plat for Murphy's Park Subdivision, Section 2. 01-23  5- 1-01 Approves the subdivision plat for Murphy's Park Subdivision, Section 3. 01-57 12- 1-01 Approves the subdivision plat for Lake of Powell, Section 6, Part 2. 02-10  4- 9-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Powell Place, Section 4. 02-13  4- 9-02 Approves the plat for the re-dedication of Grace Drive. 02-48 10-15-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 1, Phase C. 02-49 10-15-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 1, Phase D. 02-50 11- 5-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 6, Phase B, Part 1. 02-51 10-15-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 2, Phase B. 02-52 10-15-02 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 1, Phase B. 03-05  1-21-03 Approves the subdivision plat for Golf Village, Section 12, Phases A and B. 03-06  1-21-03 Approves the plat for Woodcutter Drive. 03-08  1-21-03 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 7 Phase B. 03-18  5- 6-03 Approves the plat for Murphy's Park Section 4. 03-19  4-22-03 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 8 Phase A. 03-20  4-22-03 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 8 Phase B. 03-32  6- 3-03 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 5 Phase A. 03-33  6- 3-03 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 7 Phase C. 03-55 12-16-03 Approves the plat for Rutherford Estates Subdivision. 03-73 12-16-03 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Ashmoore, Section 1 Subdivision. 03-74 12-16-03 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Ashmoore, Section 3 Subdivision. 04-11  6-15-04 Approves the plat for the Woods of Powell South. 04-28  4- 6-04 Approves the plat for the Golf Village Section 6 Phase B Part II. 04-43  7- 6-04 Approves the plat for Golf Village Commercial Section 1. 04-44  7- 6-04 Approves the plat for Golf Village Commercial Section 2. 04-45  6-15-04 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 4 Phase C. 04-52  7-20-04 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 6 Phase B. 04-64 11- 3-04 Approves the plat for Golf Village Section 12, Phases C and D. 04-68 10-19-04 Accepts the public improvements of Golf Village Section 7, Phase A. 04-70 11- 3-04 Accepts the public improvements of Lakes of Powell Section 5. 04-71 11- 3-04 Accepts the public improvements of Lakes of Powell Section 6, Part 1. 04-72 11- 3-04 Accepts the public improvements of Lakes of Powell Section 6, Part 2. 05-09  2-15-05 Approves the plat for the Murphy Park, Section 5 Subdivision. 05-26  5-17-05 Approves the plat for the Woods of Powell North, Phase 1 Subdivision. 05-28  6-7-05 Approves the plat for the Golf Village, Section 6, Phase B Part III Subdivision. 05-41  8-16-05 Approves the plat for the Junia Glen Subdivision. 05-59 11- 1-05 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Murphy's Park, Section 2 Subdivision. 05-60 11- 1-05 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Murphy's Park, Section 3 Subdivision. 05-62 12- 6-05 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 7, Phase B Subdivision. 06-01  1- 3-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 4, Phase A Subdivision. 06-02  1- 3-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 3, Phase B Subdivision. 06-03  1- 3-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 4, Phase B Subdivision. 06-07  2- 7-06 Approves the plat for Golf Village Commercial, Sub Area E. 06-29  4-18-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Chambers Glen Subdivision. 06-33  5-16-06 Final acceptance of the public improvement of Golf Village Section 6, Phase B, Part 1 Subdivision. 06-37  6- 6-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Murphy Park, Section 4 Subdivision. 06-41  7- 5-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 3, Phase A. 06-42  7- 5-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Powell Place, Phase IV Subdivision. 06-49  7-18-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 1, Phase D Subdivision. 06-54  9- 5-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 1, Phase C Subdivision. 06-55  9-19-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 1, Phase B Subdivision. 06-56  9-19-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Murphy Park Section 1, Subdivision. 06-62 10- 3-06 Final acceptance for the West Case Ave. public improvements constructed by Capital City Builders in association with Powell Industrial Plaza. 2006-69 11-21-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Rutherford Estates Subdivision. 2006-71 12-05-06 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 2, Phase B Subdivision. 2007-22  4-17-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 7, Phase C Subdivision. 2007-27  6- 5-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 8, Phase A Subdivision. 2007-28  6- 5-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 8, Phase B Subdivision. 2007-29  6-19-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village, Section 6, Phase B, Part II Subdivision. 2007-50 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Murphy Park Section 5 Subdivision. 2007-51 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 1, Phase A Subdivision. 2007-52 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 5, Phase A Subdivision. 2007-53 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 9-2, Part A Subdivision. 2007-54 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 9-2, Part B Subdivision. 2007-55 10- 2-07 Final acceptance of the public improvements of the Woods of Powell South Subdivision. 2008-04  2- 5-08 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 5, Phase B Subdivision. 2008-18  6-17-08 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 5, Phase A Subdivision. 2008-21  7-15-08 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Middlebury Estates Subdivision. 2008-33 10- 7-08 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 6, Phase B, Part III Subdivision. 2008-34 10- 7-08 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Woods of Powell North Phase I Subdivision. 2009-09  3- 3-09 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Junia Glen Subdivision as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in Cabinet 3, Slide 793, Delaware County, Ohio Records. 2009-40 12-15-09 Final acceptance of the public improvements of Woods of Powell North, Phase 2, Part 1 Subdivision as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in Cabinet 4, Slide 3-3A, Delaware County, Ohio Records. 2010-13  3-16-10 Accepts the dedication of the 22.735 acre parcel of land located along Seldom Seen Road. 2010-27  8- 4-10 Approves the plat for the Golf Village, Section 7, Phase D, Part 2. 2010-53 11-16-10 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 7, Phase D, Part I as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in Cabinet 2, Slides 794- 794A-794B, Delaware County, Ohio, Recorder's Office. 2010-62 12-21-10 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements, a part of the 8 North Liberty Street Improvement Plans as approved on March 17, 2008, constructed by Stavroff Land Development Company, Inc. 2013-23  6- 4-13 Approves the plat for the Golf Village, Section 7, Phase D, Part 3. 2014-01  1-21-14 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 7, Phase D, Part 2 as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in Official Record 992, Pages 1308-1309, Delaware County, Ohio Recorder's Office. 2014-07  2-18-14 Approving the plat for Morgan Place Subdivision, a subdivision of six single family lots utilizing two common access driveways, located on 4.621 acres at 8610 Liberty Road. 2014-08  2-18-14 Approving the subdivision plat for Wedgewood Limited Partnership 1, by Wedgewood Inc. for the property at the southwest corner of Sawmill Parkway and North Hampton Drive. 2014-18  4-15-14 Approving the subdivision plat for the Reserve at Scioto Glenn, Phase 1, by Metro Development, LLC for the property south of Home Road and west of Steitz Road. 2015-30  7- 7-15 Approving the subdivision plat for the Reserve at Scioto Glenn, Phase 2, by Metro Development, LLC for the property south of Home Road and west of Steitz Road. 2015-43  9-15-15 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Woods of Powell North, Phase 2, Part 2 as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in Official Record 977, Pages 1822-1823, Delaware County, Ohio Recorder's Office. 2015-45  9-15-15 Approving the plat for the Murphy Parkway Extension. 2015-52 12-15-15 Approving final development plan for a proposed 308 residential unit active adult community, and 5 acres of planned commericial development on roughly 39 acres. 2015-61 12-15-15 Approving the subdivision plat for Verona, Phase 1, by Verona, LLC for 4436 W. Powell Road. 2015-64 12-23-15 Declaring the improvement of certain parcels of real property to be a public purpose and exempt from taxation. 2016-03  1-19-16 Approving the subdivision plat for Powell Grand, by Sawmill Seldom Seen, LLC for the property south of Seldom Seen Rd., west of the CSX Railroad. 2016-25  7- 5-16 Approving the final development plan for Armita Plaza. 2016-35  8-16-16 Approving the final development plan for Transform Construction, LLC. 2016-38  8-16-16 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a contract with Meyers & Associates for the purpose of performing professional architectural and engineering services for the park at Seldom Seen Rd, Phases 1, 2 and 3. 2016-43  9-20-16 Authorizing the award for the Powell Park improvements. 2016-45 10- 4-16 Approving the subdivision plat for the Reserve at Scioto Glenn, Phase 3. 2016-57 12- 6-16 Approving the final development plan to construct an approximately 88,320 square foot, three-story, storage facility on 3.02 acres at Village Park Drive North of Penny Lake. 2016-63 12-20-16 Approving the final development plan to construct a 3,672 square foot addition to an existing child care facility at 14 Grace Drive. 2017-02  1-17-17 Approving the subdivision plat for Verona, Phase 2. 2017-13  4-18-17 Approving a final development plan for Pulte Homes of Ohio LLC to construct a residential subdivision consisting of 183 units on approximately 108.851 acres, located on both sides of Steitz Road near Hunters Bend. 2017-14  6- 6-17 Approving a final development plan for Harper's Pointe to construct 47 single-family fee simple patio homes on 8.75 acres at 2470 West Powell Road. 2017-20  6-20-17 Approving a final development plan for Margello Development Company to construct two vehicle storage buildings and two office/warehouse buildings or four office/warehouse buildings on approximately 4.49 acres located at West Sawmill Road at Zion Drive. 2017-21  6-20-17 Approving a final development plan for the Ellis Company, LTD/Cole Ellis to renovate an existing self-storage site to remove boat and RV storage and replace it with new self-storage buildings for the property located at 72 Industrial Park Place. 2017-22  8-15-17 Conditionally accept and begin the required minimum two-year maintenance period for public improvements with regard to the Verona Subdivision, Phase 2 as the same is delineated upon the plants thereof recorded in O.R. 1497, Page 1712, Delaware County, Ohio records. 2017-26  6-20-17 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of Golf Village Section 7, Phase D, Part 3 as the same is numbered and delineated upon the amended plat thereof recorded in official record BK 1233, Pages 1266-1267, Delaware County, Ohio Recorder's Office. 2017-27  6-20-17 Grants final acceptance of the public improvements of the pedestrian pathway improvements, a part of the Presidential Pointe improvement plans as approved on August 29, 2006, constructed by Presidential Pointe, LLC. 2017-37  9- 5-17 Approving a final development plan for DJCF Holdings LLC to construct a 3,000 square foot building on an existing site located at 18-36 Grace Drive. 2017-38  9- 5-17 Approving a combined preliminary and final development plan for Ford & Associates Architects/Dr. Khaksarfard to construct a 13,606 square food retail center on 1.51 acres at the southeast corner of West Olentangy Street and Murphy Parkway. 2017-50 10-17-17 Approving a combined preliminary and final development plan by Beatz Studio for a proposal to construct a fitness studio on 1.18 acres for the property located at 80 Clairedan Drive. 2017-51 10-17-17 Authorizing the City Manager to convey a .098 +/- acre tract of land on Grace Drive to the Powell Community Improvement Corporation to provide for its subsequent conveyance to DJCF Holdings, LLC pursuant to Ordinance 2017-37. 2017-64 12-19-17 Amending Ordinance 2015-64 to add a certain parcel of real property to the declaration of public purpose made in that ordinance. 2018-01  1-16-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a contract with Trucco Construction for the purpose of performing construction services for site work and related appurtenances for the Park at Seldom Seen Road, Phases 1, 2 and 3. 2018-02  1-16-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a contract with Thomas & Marker Construction for the purposes of performing construction services for the Park Building and related appurtenances for the Park at Seldom Seen Road, Phases 1, 2, and 3. 2018-07  2-20-18 Approving the subdivision plat for Carpenter's Mill, Section 1, Part A, by Pulte Homes of Ohio LLC for the property located at Steitz Road and Hunters Bend. 2018-08  2-20-18 Approving the subdivision plat for Carpenter's Mill, Section 1, Part B, by Pulte Homes of Ohio LLC for the property located at Steitz Road and Hunters Bend. 2018-11  2-20-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a cooperative project agreement with Delaware County for the purpose of making improvements to the intersection of Liberty Road and Seldom Seen Road. 2018-13  3- 6-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a cooperative project agreement with Delaware County for the purpose of making improvements to Seldom Seen Road west o Liberty Road to the CSX Railroad tracks and spot repairs on Seldom Seen Road west of the CSX Railroad tracks to Sawmill Parkway. 2018-09(Res)  6-19-18 Conditionally accept and begin the required, minimum two-year maintenance period for the public improvement of a bike path and storm sewers, a part of the improvements plan of 55 S. Liberty Street. 2018-21  5-15-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a contract with EMH&T for the purpose of preforming professional engineering services for the resurfacing and related appurtenances of Sawmill Road, between Seldom Seen and Home Roads (DEL-CR609-2.24, PID 105806). 2018-26  6-19-18 Approving the subdivision plat for Verona, Phase 3, by Verona, LLC for the property north of Powell Road (S.R. 750) at 4127 Seldom Seen Road. 2018-28  8- 7-18 Approving a final development plan for Mews at Zion to construct four, 2-unit residential buildings on 1.51854 acres at 10331 Sawmill Road. 2018-56 11-20-18 Approving the subdivision plat for Mews at Zion, by Elite Real Estate Holdings, for the property located at the Southeast corner of Sawmill Road and Zion Drive. 2019-01  1-29-19 Approving a combined preliminary and final development plan for Jennifer Carney of Carney Ranker Architects, LTD to construct and Athletic Facility on 1.861 acres on Woodcutter Drive. 2019-04  2- 5-19 Approving a final development plan for Ohio State University to construct a medical office building, ambulatory care medical facility, and hospital on 44.29 +/- acres at the Northeast corner of Sawmill Parkway and Home Road. 2019-05  2- 5-19 Approving the easement vacation play for Golf Village North Revised and the re-plat of Lots 5140 through 5148 Gold Village North Commercial Revised for the property located at 3315 Royal Belfast Boulevard.  
TABLE E-ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY 
Ord. No. Date Description 84-06  1-24-84 Offers for sale by bid the parcel known as the old waterworks property. 88-09  3-23-88 Accepts bid of Planned Communities, Inc. and Sunnational Group, Inc. for property known as the old school site. 88-11  4-19-88 Delineating alternatives relative to bid accepted by Ord. 88-09. 88-26  9-20-88 Accepts bid of Planned Communities, Inc. and the Johns Co., Inc. for property known as the old school site. 89-09  3-23-88 Authorizes purchase of 50 W. Olentangy St. and 43 Scioto St. 89-12 Repeals Ord. 89-09. 89-25 9-5-89 Authorizes purchase of 16.87 acres from J.W. and C.T. Hill. 89-28 10-17-89 Authorizes purchase of 20.67 acres from C.D. and H.E. Baughman. Res. 90-08  2-6-90 Authorizes submission of a petition to the voters regarding purchase of 20.67 acres from C.D. and H.E. Baughman. 90-2  6- 5-90 Repeals Ord. 89-28. 91-38  8-20-91 Authorizes sale of .026 acre to the State of Ohio. 91-65 12- 3-91 Authorizes sale of itemized municipal property worth $800.00. 96-04  2- 6-96 Authorizes the purchase of real estate from Khempco Building Supply Co. for $1,450,000. 96-47  9-17-96 Approves the terms of the Real Estate Purchase Contract with Khempco Building Supply Co. Limited Partnership. 97-63  2- 8-98 Authorizes various deeds of conveyance and/or easements regarding development of the Lakes of Powell with the developer, the Olentangy School Board and a neighboring property owner. 01-36  6- 5-01 Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a purchase contract for property located at 30 Hall St. 02-20  5- 7-02 Appropriates a fee simple interest in 0.608 acres north of Seldom Seen Road for roadway purposes. 03-14  3- 4-03 Authorizes the purchase of 2.140 acres from Antoinette Talbott for the purpose of right of way. 03-78 12-16-03 Authorizes the purchase of 10158 Liberty Road. 04-51 10-12-04 Authorizes the City Manager to execute an agreement for the sale/exchange of Municipal property described in Exhibit A. 04-84 12-21-04 Reaffirms and amends Ord. 04-51. 06-25  4- 4-06 Authorizes the purchase of a 0.030 acre tract from Patsy Saylor for road right of way purposes. 07-07  2-12-07 Authorizes the purchase of a 0.014 acre tract from Stauroff Land and Development Inc. for road right of way purposes. 12-44 12- 4-12 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an assignment and assumption and quit-claim deed for purposes of clarifying maintenance responsibilities for certain drainage easements. 2014-33  6-17-14 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a real estate purchase and sale agreement with CSX Transportation, Inc. to acquire a 0.21+/- acre parcel on Depot Street. 2015-33  7- 7-15 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a real estate purchase and sale agreement with CSX Transportation, Inc. to acquire a 0.21 +/- acre parcel on Depot Street. 2018-27  7-17-18 Authorize the City Manager to convey a .034 +/- acre tract of land and a .151 +/- acre tract of land on Depot Street to the Powell Community Improvement Corporation to provide for a subsequent ground lease of such tracts to McClurg Properties LLC. 2018-44 10- 2-18 Appropriate Fee Simple Title to a 0.173 acre tract, more or less, for public right-of-way, without limitation of existing access rights, from Moreland Street, LLC. 2018-45 10- 2-18 Appropriate Fee Simple Title to a 0.214 acre tract, more or less, and a 0.032 acre tract, more or less, for the public right-of-way, without limitation of existing access rights, from Triangle Properties, Inc.  
TABLE F-LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY 
Ord. No. Date Description Res. 91  2- 4-75 Authorizes lease of vacated Powell School property to Olentangy Board of Education. Res. 93  3- 4-75 Finalizes lease of Powell School grounds to Olentangy Board of Education. Res. 85-07 11-12-85 Approves lease of office space at 35 N. Liberty St. Res. 89-17  8-15-89 Modifies lease agreement for municipal offices. 90-08  2- 6-90 Authorizes execution of agreement in favor of the Board of Trustees of the Delaware County District Library for the lease of land. 90-36  8- 7-90 Ratifies a lease agreement for municipal office space. 91-02  7- 2-91 Authorizes execution of a lease agreement with the Board of Trustees of the Delaware County District Library. 91-04  2- 5-91 Ratifies a lease agreement for municipal office space. 91-49 10- 1-91 Authorizes extension of a lease agreement with Mary Thomas for Village offices. 06-57  9-19-06 Ratifying the lease agreement for the premises known as 44 North Liberty St. with the River of Life Assembly of God. 07-09  2-12-07 Amends lease agreement for the premises known as 44 North Liberty St. with the River of Life Assembly of God. 09-41 12-15-09 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a lease agreement for the premises known as 44 North Liberty Street, with Historic Downtown Powell, Inc.  
TABLE G-STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CURB LINES 
Ord. No. Date Description 88-31 10-18-88 Woods Hollow Way to Woods Hollow Lane. 90-01  1-16-90 Twin Rivers Parkway to Bennett Parkway. 90-16  2-20-90 Naming an unnamed stub road Burton Dr. 99-23  5-18-99 Liberty Parkway renamed Salisbury Drive.  
TABLE H-ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY 
Ord. No. Date Description Res. 42  4- 6-71 Authorizing annexation of property of Mr. Huffman. Res. 49  1- 4-72 Annexation application of L.V. and D.E. Huffman for 21.55 acres in Liberty Twp. Res. 81  4- 2-74 Annexation application of Olentangy Woods, Ltd., for 450.973 acres in Liberty Twp. Res. 107 10- 7-75 Annexation application of Paul Latham, et al for 8 acres in Liberty Twp. 80-14  5- 6-80 Accepts annexation petition filed by Lenza Claymier, et al. 84-23 10- 2-84 Annexation application of Powell Investment Group. 87-15  6- 2-87 Annexation application of Sunnational Group, Inc. et al for a 109.467 acre parcel. 88-12  5-17-88 Annexation application of W.C. Bennett et al for a 217.4144 acre parcel. 88-31 10-18-88 Annexation application of E.T. and M.L. Carty for 3.779 acres. 90-21  3-20-90 Annexation application of J.W. Hill et al for 120.206 acres. 91-06  2- 5-91 Annexation application of C.D. Ruff and N.R. DeWeese for 117 acres. 91-55 11-19-91 Annexation application of the President's Club Investment Corp. for 38.836 acres. 92-05  2-11-92 Annexation application of B.U.S. Ltd. for 87.5 acres. 92-06  2- 4-92 Sets forth certain agreements of the annexation of an 87.5 acre parcel in the name of B.U.S. Ltd. 93-43  7-20-93 Annexation of 33.828 acres being the property of Rainbow Subdivision No. 1, Inc. et al. 94-12  3-15-94 Annexation of 122.731 acres, being the property of Rennob, Inc., and Charles and Barbara Bonner. 96-52  9-17-96 Annexation of 3.963 acres from Liberty Township. 96-53  9-17-96 Annexation of 19.588 acres from Liberty Township. 97-24  6-24-97 Annexation of a 35.2 acre tract, being the property of Aileen W. Chambers, Trustee, et. al. 97-49 11- 4-97 Annexation of 6.237 acres being the property of Scott C. Garverick. 98-27  7-21-98 Annexation of a 55.1 acre tract upon petition of Harrison W. Smith. 00-03  3- 7-00 Annexation of a 5.121 acre tract upon petition of David J. Gordon. 00-40 12- 5-00 Annexation of an 86.8 acre tract upon petition of Robert Albright. 01-54 11- 6-01 Annexation of a 3 acre tract upon petition of Robert Albright. 02-30  8- 6-02 Annexation of a 935.52 acre tract upon petition of Robert Albright. 02-46 10- 1-02 Annexation of 0.955 acre tract upon petition of Rich and C. Brahm. 02-47 11- 5-02 Annexation of a 137.8 acre tract upon petition of Harrison Smith. 03-03  1-21-03 Annexation of 49.552 acres by Stephen DeWeese, agent for the petitioners. 03-24  5-20-03 Annexation of 2.065 acres by Jackson Reynolds, agent for the petitioners. 03-29  5-20-03 Annexation of a 0.9 acre tract by Harrison Smith, agent for the petitioners. 04-12  3-23-04 Annexation of a 3.308 acre tract by Kenneth Young, agent for the petitioners. 04-13  3-16-04 Annexation of a 5.461 acre tract by Jackson Reynolds, agent for the petitioners. 05-16  5- 4-05 Annexation of a 3.999 acre tract by William Fergus, agent for the petitioners. 05-34  6-21-05 Annexation of 3.552 acre tract by Charles Bluestone, agent for the petitioners. 05-43  8-16-05 Annexation of a 9.556 acre tract by James Dietz, agent for the petitioners. 05-65 12- 6-05 Annexation of a 1.446 acre tract by Jim Lubinsky, agent for the petitioner. 06-34  6- 6-06 Annexation of a 9.341 acre tract by Vincent Margello agent for the petitioner. 07-49 10- 2-07 Annexation of a 1.618 acre tract by Gary Gitlitz agent/petitioner. 07-58 12- 3-07 Annexation of 9.575 acres by Eugene Hollins agent/petitioner. 09-16  4-21-09 Annexation of a 9.774 acre tract by Robert A. Meyer. 10-12  3-16-10 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with CVS 5457 OH, LLC. 10-14  4-6-10 Annexation of a 26.9 acre tract upon a petition filed by Eugene L. Hollins, Agent. 10-22  6- 1-10 Makes technical corrections to Ordinance 2010-14 and 2010-15 regarding the referenced amount of acreage of the Market at Liberty Crossing, LLC tract. 10-45  3- 1-11 Annexation of a 2.501 acre tract as applied for in the petition of CVS OH, LLC. 2013-15  5- 7-13 Annexation of a 67.49 acre tract, upon petition by Jill Tangeman, Agent, Vorys, Sater, Seymour and Pease LLP. 2013-21  6-25-13 Annexation of a 2.75-acre tract, more or less, upon petition by Thomas L. Hart, Agent, Wiles, Boyle, Burkholder & Bringardner. 2013-37  9- 3-13 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into pre-annexation agreements with Wedgewood Limited Partnership I and Mount Carmel Health System. 2013-44 10- 1-13 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Spectrum Acquisition Powell, LLC and Hendy Enterprises, Ltd. 2013-60  1- 7-14 Annexation of a 60.23 acre tract, more or less upon petition by Thomas L. Hart, Agent, Isaac, Wiles, Burkholder & Teetor. 2014-09  6- 3-14 Annexation of a 5.072 acre tract, more or less, upon petition by Jack Reynolds, Agent, Smith and Hale LLC. 2014-23  5-20-14 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Dogwood Enterprises Limited Partnership and Ganzhorn Real Estate of Powell, LLC. 2014-43  8- 5-14 Annexation of a 5.001-acre tract, more or less, upon petition by David J. Gordon, Gordon Law Office, agent. 2014-47  9- 2-14 Annexation of a 5.147-acre tract, more or less, upon petition by Thomas L. Hart, Isaac, Wiles, Burkholder & Teetor, agent. 2014-52 10- 7-14 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Spectrum Acquisition Powell, LLC and Liberty C, LLC. 2015-14  6-16-15 Annexation of a 7.226 acre tract, more or less, upon petition by Jack Reynolds, Agent, Smith and Hale. 2015-15  4-21-15 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an annexation agreement by and between the Township of Liberty and the City of Powell. 2015-16  4-21-15 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Verona, LLC. 2015-17  4-21-15 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Sawmill Seldom Seen LLC and Schottenstein Real Estate Group, LLC. 2015-38  9-15-15 Annexation of a 43.88-acre tract, more or less to the City with the Board of Delaware County Commissioners, by Thomas L. Hart, Agent, Isaac Wiles. 2015-41  9-15-15 Annexation of 113.59 acres, more or less to the City with the Board of Delaware County Commissioners, by David W. Fisher, Agent, Kephart Fisher, LLC. 2016-61 12- 6-16 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Robert L. Smith and Jerry L. Smith, Individual landowners of 70+/- acres, Timothy Shelly, and individual landowner of 38+/- acres, and Pulte Homes of Ohio, LLC. 2017-07  2-21-17 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Arc Sawmill LLC. 2017-12  4-18-17 Accepting the annexation of 108.851 acres, more or less, from Liberty Township 2017-49 10-17-17 Accepting the annexation of 1.1186 acres, more or less, from Liberty Township to the City of Powell. 2018-29  7- 5-18 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with the Ohio State University. 2018-51  2- 5-19 Accepting the annexation of 44.29 +/- acres, more or less, located at the corner of Sawmill Parkway and Home Road, from Liberty Township to the City of Powell. 2019-08  2-19-19 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Home Steitz, LLC and TLK Development.  
TABLE I-ZONING MAP CHANGES 
Ord. No. Date Description 61  9- 1-59 7.07 acres owned by Earl Williams from residential to commercial. 90  2- 4-64 Certain property from single-family residential to industrial. 94  8-11-64 Certain property from single-family residential to commercial. 101  6-21-66 Lots 54 and 55 from residential to commercial. 117  7- 1-69 Lot 31 from residential to commercial. 138  4-12-72 Louis Huffman's land from residential to commercial. 141  5-16-72 12.672 acres owned by W.M. Wilcox from commercial to industrial. 143  9- 5-72 3.92 acres bounded by the Blaine property, the Longhenry property, the Pendleton property and C & O Railroad Co. for industrial purposes. 145 12-12-72 Inlot 78 from residential to commercial. 164  5- 6-75 Outlot No. 1 from residential (R-1) to two-family dwellings. 80-7  4- 8-80 Property owned by Paul and Ruth LeCrone from residential to office-institutional. 80-21 12-15-80 Property on the north side of SR 750, east of Liberty St. from rural and PUD-4 to PUD-4. 81-4  4- 7-81 Land on Depot St. from neighborhood commercial to community commercial. 81-6  5- 5-81 Lots 40 and 41 from residential to office institutional. 81-7  5- 5-81 12.011 acres at the end of West Case Ave. from residential to light industrial. 81-15 12- 1-81 Two parcels on East SR 750 from residential to neighborhood commercial. 82-14 12- 7-8 Land owned by P. and D. Kirkham on East Olentangy St. from residential to neighborhood commercial. 82-15 12- 7-82 Property at 3660 SR 750 from residential to planned neighborhood center. 83-23  5-17-83 Parcel at Lot 30 on South Liberty St. from residential to neighborhood commercial. 83-48 12- 6-83 Two parcels on West Olentangy St. from residential to commercial with stipulations. 84-08  1-24-84 Five parcels on North Liberty St. from residential to community commercial. 84-09  2-14-84 Parcel at 77 South Liberty St. from residential to community commercial. 87-16  6-2-87 103.9 acres in the name of Sunnational Group, Inc. et al from rural district (R1) to planned residential district (PRD). 87-24  7-21-87 Don Antonio's Ristorante and Lounge from neighborhood commercial (C-2) to planned commercial (PC) 88-14  3-31-88 217.41 acres in the name of Bennett, Ruff and Liberty Hills Realty from rural district (R1) to planned residential district (PRD). 88-18  7- 5-88 6.692 acres in the name of the Village to planned commercial (PC). 88-23  8-22-88 1.23 acres in the name of Donna Lawrence to planned commercial (PC). 89-11  5- 2-89 Property at 58 E. Olentangy St. from rural district (R1) to planned commercial (PC). 89-14  5-16-89 Property at 59 E. Olentangy St. from rural district to planned commercial. 89-27  8-15-89 .482 acre in the name of R. & C. McGowan from low density residential (R2) to planned commercial (PC). 89-38  1- 2-90 Portions of a 120.206 acre tract owned by J.W. Hill et al from R1 to planned industrial (PI) and planned commercial (PC). 92-30  7-21-92 Powell Place Phase I to planned residence district (PRD). 92-44 10-20-92 Adopting a new official zoning map. 93-36  6-15-93 Liberty Ridge zoned Planned Residence District. 94-18  7- 5-94 Lot No. 1823 (John D. Wolf Commerce Park) zoned Planned Industrial. 94-19  7- 5-94 Adopts a new official Zoning Map. 94-39  8-16-94 Repeals Ord. 94-18. 94-40  8-16-94 Repeals Ord. 94-19. 95-29  9- 5-95 Grandshire Section 5 zoned Planned Residence District. 96-01  3- 5-96 2.9 acres of R and 1.0 acres of FR-1 Liberty Township Farm Residence District to 3.9 acres of PO, Planned Office District for property located at 9058 North Liberty St. 96-08  3- 5-96 The Lakes of Powell zoned PR. 97-01  2- 4-97 Approving final development plan for the Olentangy Local School District Fourth Elementary School, zoned PR, Planned Residence District. 97-10  4-25-97 Approves final development plan for the Hill Tract Condominiums and amending the Zoning Map to PR. 97-36  7- 1-97 Approves the final development plan for Chambers Glen Subdivision and amending the zoning classification to PR. 97-53 12-16-97 15.689 acres of FR-1, Liberty Township Farm Residence District annexed in 1992 zoned PC. 97-54 12-16-97 7.753 acres of FR-1, Liberty Township Farm Residence District annexed in 1992 zoned PC. 99-49 10- 5-99 Property located at 30 Depot St. from OPR to OPC. 00-08  9- 5-00 15.689 acres from FR-1, Liberty Township Farm Residence District annexed in 1992 Zoned PR. 00-09  9- 5-00 7.753 acres from FR-1, Liberty Township Farm Residence District annexed in 1992 Zoned PR. 00-10  6- 6-00 1.056 acres behind a 3.092 acre parcel on Village Park Drive south of John D. Wolf Commerce Park from R to PI. 00-24  9- 5-00 5 acres located at the southwest corner of Claireden Drive and North Liberty St. from R to PO. 00-41 12- 5-00 99.887 acres known as the Murphy property from FR-1 (Liberty Township Farm Residential District) and PI to PR and PC. 02-02  1-15-02 Property recently annexed into Municipality at 10136 Sawmill Rd. from Liberty Township PC to PC. 02-31  8- 6-02 935.92 acres recently annexed into the City from Liberty Township, PR, PC and Office District to PR, PC and PI. 06-35  6- 6-06 9.341 acres at the southeast corner of Sawmill Parkway and Presidential Parkway which was recently annexed into the City from Liberty Township PC to City of Powell PC. 07-49 10- 2-07 1.618 acre parcel located at 3301 and 3313 Home Road from Liberty Township FR-1 to City PC. 09-10  3-17-09 Approving the zoning map amendment for Golf Village Self Storage, LTD., for 6.249 acres at the Southeast corner of Home Road and Woodcutter Avenue from City of Powell PI, Planned Industrial District (pursuant to C.E.D.A. requirements) to City of Powell, PC, Planned Commercial District. 09-17  4-21-09 A 9.774-acre tract, more or less, from Liberty Township PC, Planned Commercial District to City of Powell PC, Planned Commercial District. 2015-24  6-16-15 7.226 +/- acres at Lots 5124 & 5125 at Liberty Crossing from Liberty Township PC, Planned Commercial District to City of Powell, PC, Planned Commercial District. 2015-39  9-15-15 43.88 acres at the southeast corner of Seldom Seen Road and Sawmill Parkway from Liberty Township, PC, Planned Commercial District and PI, Planned Industrial District to City of Powell, PC Planned Commercial District. 2016-44 11- 1-16 8.75 acres at 2470 West Powell Rd., R, Residence District and PC, Planned Commercial District to DR, Downtown Residence District. 2018-52 11-20-18 5.366 acres at 185 North Liberty Street. 2019-04  2- 5-19 Ohio State University to construct a medical office building, ambulatory care medical facility, and hospital on 44.29 +/- acres at the Northeast corner of Sawmill Parkway and Home Road. 2019-06  2-19-19 4.011 +/- acres at 2770 Carriage Road, amending the Zoning Map from Farm Residence District to PR, Planned Residence District.  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Ohio Constitution and Ohio Revised Code. 
Ohio Constitution 
Article Section Section  
this Code II 35 Ch. 155 XV 6 Ch. 517 6(C)(9) 182.053 10 Char., Art. XIV XVIII 3 182.011 1305.01 7 Char., Art. XIV 9 Char.,  12.01  
O.R.C. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 101.01 1.02(A) 101.02 1.04 Ch. 103 1.14 Ch. 103 101.03 721.08 1.15 101.03 1.23 101.05 1.42 101.03 1.43 101.03 1.44 101.03 1.45 101.03 1.46 101.06 1.47 101.07 1.48 101.07 1.49 101.07 1.50 101.08 1.51 101.06 1.52 101.06 1.54 101.04 1.55 101.05 1.56 101.05 1.57 101.04 1.58 101.04 1.59(F) 101.02 1.59 517.01 5.01 Ch. 103 5.20 et seq. Ch. 103 tit. 7 1511.01 7.16 335.16 9.01 Ch. 151 9.08 525.12 9.41 Ch. 155 9.42 Ch. 181 Ch. 182 9.43 Ch. 155 9.44 Ch. 155 9.60 331.44 9.66 525.02 101.71 501.06 101.91 501.06 ch. 102 Ch. 155 102.03(A) 501.06 102.03(G), (H), (I) 525.11 109.69 549.01 109.71-109.79 517.01 109.71(A)(11), (12), (14), (19) 313.11 109.77 Ch. 139 109.572 537.19 109.801 549.02 549.04 111.15 1305.02 ch. 119 335.15 337.10 517.06 517.11 119.01-119.13 339.03 119.12 Ch. 1501 120.39 Ch. 143 121.22 1121.08 121.61 501.06 122.66 517.01 125.30 182.03 ch. 128 537.12 128.01 537.12 128.32 537.12 128.99 537.12 131.02 182.70 133.032 Ch. 153 ch. 145 Ch. 155 146.01 517.01 149.39 151.03 149.43 182.18 177.01-177.03 140.04 177.02 140.04 182.91 182.70 187.01 525.01 303.081 et seq. 303.082 303.25 Ch. 1121 305.31-305.41 335.16 306.30-306.54 339.03 306.35(Y) 501.01 525.03 307.93 501.99 309.06 525.10 311.07 501.01 311.29(E) 525.01 341.14 501.99 341.19 501.99 341.21 501.99 341.23 501.99 537.03 505.441 Ch. 139 517.06 et seq. 517.13 519.18 Ch. 1121 537.10(a)(3)-(5) 541.08 541.03 541.08 541.04 541.08 573.70 182.71 701.01(F) 101.02 701.05 Ch. 909 709.023 182.03 711.01 et seq. Ch. 1107 Ch. 1109 711.03 Ch. 1105 711.06 Ch. 1107 711.08 Ch. 1109 Ch. 1115 711.09 Ch. 1109 Ch. 1107 Ch. 1115 711.14 Ch. 1105 ch. 713 1121.11 713.10 Ch. 1127 Ch. 1131 Ch. 1141 Ch. 1305 713.11 Ch. 1121 Ch. 1135 713.13 Ch. 1133 Ch. 1135 713.15 Ch. 1125 715.08 Ch. 921 715.19 Ch. 909 715.26(B) Ch. 1311 715.26 Ch. 1325 715.261 Ch. 1311 715.29 Ch. 1325 715.43 Ch. 951 715.47 521.05 715.61 et seq. Ch. 721 715.65 Ch. 1151 715.70 182.03 182.083 715.71 182.03 715.71 182.083 715.74 182.03 717.01 Ch. 153 Ch. 909 Ch. 921 Ch. 951 Ch. 1305 717.05 et seq. Ch. 1149 ch. 718 Ch. 181 Ch. 182 182.011 182.014 182.02 182.03 182.14 182.18 718.01 182.60 718.01(A)(5) 181.01 181.02 718.01(D)(5) 182.61 718.012 182.042 718.03 182.03 718.031 182.07 718.06 Ch. 101 Ch. 501 718.12(B) 501.06 718.691 182.03 718.80-718.95 182.60 718.83 182.63 182.68 182.69 182.71 718.83(D) 182.63 718.84(E) 182.63 718.85 182.68 718.94 182.63 723.01 Ch. 909 723.011 521.06 723.012 Ch. 521 723.02 Ch. 909 723.03 Ch. 909 723.23 Ch. 909 723.31 Ch. 909 723.33 et seq. Ch. 553 723.48 Ch. 553 723.49 et seq. Ch. 521 Ch. 909 ch. 727 Ch. 909 727.07 Ch. 909 729.01 et seq. Ch. 905 729.03 et seq. Ch. 905 731.23 Ch. 101 731.231 Ch. 1315 Ch. 1319 731.51 et seq. Ch. 521 Ch. 557 733.621 525.10 737.01 501.01 737.04 Ch. 139 737.08 Ch. 1501 737.161 Ch. 140 737.22 Ch. 1501 737.27 Ch. 1501 737.28 Ch. 1325 737.29 et seq. Ch. 139 737.32 Ch. 303 737.34 et seq. Ch. 1501 737.37 Ch. 1325 ch. 742 Ch. 139 Ch. 140 743.01 Ch. 921 743.25 Ch. 921 753.02 501.99 753.04 501.99 753.16 501.99 753.21 537.03 755.12 et seq. Ch. 955 755.17 Ch. 153 901.51 541.06 901.99(A) 541.06 925.62 505.12 935.01 505.13 935.04 505.13 935.18 505.13 935.99 505.13 951.02 505.01 951.10 Ch. 505 955.01 Ch. 505 955.011 505.03 525.15 545.01 955.11 505.001 955.16 505.03 955.22 505.14 955.99(D) 505.03 955.99 505.14 956.06 505.071 959.01 505.04 959.02 505.05 959.03 505.06 959.04 505.05 505.06 959.13 505.07 959.131 505.071 959.132 505.071 959.99 505.04 959.99(B) 505.05 959.99(C) 505.06 959.99(D) 505.07 959.99 505.071 971.33 et seq. Ch. 557 ch. 1345 517.15 tit. XXXIX 545.07 1332.21 537.10 1332.32 741.01 1333.61 501.01 1345.21 et seq. Ch. 721 1349.16 545.09 ch. 1509 Ch. 731 ch. 1515 1111.07 1521.062 1111.054 1521.14 Ch. 1305 1531.01 505.071 517.02 549.04 1533.103 549.04 1533.92 517.02 1546.01 537.17 541.10 1547.11 333.01 ch. 1705 182.03 ch. 1713 509.06 ch. 1716 517.07 Ch. 721 721.04 721.05 1717.01 505.071 ch. 1901 Ch. 171 1901.01 Ch. 171 1901.26 Ch. 171 1901.31(d) Ch. 171 1905.30 Ch. 101 2133.21 509.03 509.05 509.06 537.051 ch. 2151 533.12 2151.011 525.08 537.16 2151.022 537.18 2151.34 537.15 2151.354 335.074 2151.41 Ch. 517 2151.87 335.074 537.16 ch. 2152 537.18 2152.02 525.08 537.18 2301.56 501.99 2305.115 533.01 2305.234 537.03 2305.51 533.01 2307.011 337.27 2307.71 337.27 2307.91 337.27 2317.02 333.01 2317.02(A) 545.07 ch. 2506 Ch. 1121 1305.07 ch. 2744 1311.09 2705.02 335.01 335.02 335.05 335.06 335.072 335.073 335.074 2739.04 525.05 2739.12 525.05 2743.191 537.15 tit. 29 715.08 1147.04 2901.01 501.01 2901.02 501.02 2901.03 501.03 2901.04 501.04 2901.05 501.01 2901.11 501.05 2901.13 501.06 2901.21 501.07 2901.22 501.08 2901.23 501.11 2901.24 501.12 2903.01 501.01 537.03 549.13 2903.02 501.01 537.03 549.13 2903.03 501.01 537.03 549.13 2903.04 333.01 501.01 537.02 537.03 537.07 549.13 2903.041 537.03 2903.05 501.01 537.01 2903.06 333.01 501.01 537.02 537.021 537.07 2903.06(A)(3), (A)(4), (C), (E), (G) 537.02 2903.06(E) 537.02 2903.07 333.01 537.02 537.07 2903.08 333.01 501.01 537.02 537.021 537.07 2903.081 537.02 537.021 2903.11 501.01 525.03 537.03 549.13 2903.12 501.01 537.03 549.13 2903.13 501.01 537.03 2903.14 501.01 537.03 537.04 537.14 2903.15 501.01 2903.21 501.01 537.05 537.10 537.15 541.08 2903.211 501.01 537.051 537.15 2903.213 537.051 537.15 2903.214 537.051 537.15 2903.22 501.01 537.06 537.15 541.08 2905.01 501.01 537.17 549.13 2905.02 501.01 549.13 2905.03 537.08 2905.05 537.17 2905.11 501.01 2905.12 537.09 2905.32 501.01 533.09 2907(A)(1),(C)(1),(E)(2) 553.09 537.02 2907.01 533.01 537.10 2907.02 501.01 525.05 533.03 533.04 537.17 2907.03 501.01 533.03 533.04 537.17 2907.04 533.03 533.04 2907.05 501.01 525.05 533.04 537.17 2907.06 533.04 2907.07(B) 533.05 2907.08 533.06 2907.09 533.07 2907.12 501.01 525.05 533.03 533.04 2907.23 533.08 2907.24 533.09 2907.24(A)(1), (C)(1), (E)(2) 533.09 2907.241 533.091 2907.25 533.10 2907.31 533.11 2907.311 533.13 2907.33 533.12 2907.35 533.02 2909.01 541.04 2909.02 501.01 549.13 2909.03 501.01 541.02 2909.04 509.03 509.05 537.051 2909.06 537.14 541.03 541.08 2909.07 537.14 2909.07(2) 541.04 2909.07 541.08 2909.09 541.10 2909.10 553.04 2909.101 553.05 2909.11(B)-(D) 541.01 2909.23 549.13 2909.24 501.01 2911.01 501.01 545.01 549.13 2911.02 501.01 545.01 549.13 2911.11 501.01 545.01 549.13 2911.12 537.14 545.01 2911.12(A)(1)-(3) 501.01 2911.13 545.01 2911.21 541.05 2911.211 537.14 537.15 537.051 541.051 2911.23 541.11 2911.31 545.01 2911.32 545.01 545.12 2913.01 501.01 501.05 513.01 517.05 537.051 537.10 537.16 545.01 2913.02 313.10 2913.02(A) 513.01 2913.02 525.04 545.01 545.05 2913.03 545.01 545.06 2913.04 525.05 545.01 545.08 2913.041 545.01 2913.11 525.04 545.01 545.09 2913.21(B)(2) 525.04 2913.21 545.01 545.10 2913.31 545.01 2913.31(B) 545.20 2913.32 545.01 545.13 2913.33 545.01 545.11 2913.34 545.01 2913.40 545.01 2913.41 545.01 2913.42-2913.45 545.01 2913.42 545.14 2913.43 545.15 2913.44 545.16 2913.441 525.14 2913.45 545.17 2913.47 525.04 545.01 545.07 2913.48 545.01 2913.49 545.21 2913.51 313.10 545.01 545.18 2913.61 545.02 2913.71 545.03 2913.72 545.05 2913.81 545.01 ch. 2915 517.09 517.10 517.14 517.15 2915.01 517.01 2915.01-2915.13 517.07 2915.01-2915.12 517.14 2915.02 517.02 2915.02(G) 517.01 2915.03 517.03 2915.04 517.04 2915.05 517.05 545.01 2915.06 517.01 517.15 545.01 2915.061 517.15 2915.07-2915.11 517.13 2915.08 Ch. 517 517.01 517.02 517.06 517.07 2915.081 517.01 517.06 517.07 2915.082 517.01 2915.09 517.06 517.07 2915.091 517.07 2915.092 517.08 2915.093 517.09 2915.094 517.10 2915.10 517.01 517.11 2915.101 517.06 517.11 2915.11 517.01 517.12 2915.12 517.06 517.13 2915.13 517.01 517.14 2917.01 501.01 509.011 2917.02 501.01 2917.03 501.01 509.01 2917.04 509.02 2917.05 Ch. 509 2917.11 509.03 2917.12 509.04 2917.21 537.10 2917.21(A)(3)-(5) 541.08 2917.31 501.01 509.06 2917.32 509.07 2917.33 509.06 2919.12(B) 501.01 2919.121 537.18 2919.13 501.01 2919.151 501.01 2919.17 501.01 2919.18 501.01 2919.22(B)(1)-(4) 501.01 2919.22(C) 537.07 2919.22 537.14 2919.24 537.18 2919.25 501.01 537.14 2919.26 537.15 2919.27 537.15 2919.271 537.051 2921.01 525.01 537.051 2921.02(A), (B) 501.06 2921.03 501.01 2921.04 501.01 2921.13 525.02 2921.13(F), (H) 501.06 2921.15 525.16 2921.21 525.04 2921.22 525.05 2921.23 525.06 ch. 2925 513.12 2921.29 525.17 2921.31 525.07 2921.32 525.08 2921.321 525.15 545.01 2921.33 525.09 2921.331 303.01 2921.34 501.01 2921.41 545.01 2921.42 525.10 2921.421 525.10 2921.43 525.11 2921.43(F), (G) 501.06 2921.45 525.13 2921.51 525.03 ch. 2923 549.04 2923.01 501.13 2923.02 501.09 2923.03 501.10 2923.11 545.01 545.03 549.01 549.02 549.12 549.13 2923.12 549.02 2923.1213 549.01 2923.122 549.10 2923.125 549.01 2923.126 549.02 549.04 2923.128 549.01 549.02 549.04 2923.132 549.12 549.13 2923.132(C) 549.12 2923.15 549.03 2923.16 549.04 2923.16(D) 333.01 2923.161 501.01 2923.163 549.02 549.04 2923.17 549.06 2923.18 Ch. 549 2923.19 549.05 2923.20 549.06 2923.201 549.11 2923.211 549.07 2923.24 545.19 2923.32(A) 501.13 2923.421 501.13 2925.01 501.01 501.09 501.13 509.03 513.01 545.01 2925.02 513.01 513.05 2925.03 501.13 513.01 513.05 513.06 2925.03(C)(3)(h) 513.02 2925.04 501.13 2925.04-2925.06 513.01 2925.04 513.06 2925.05(D) 501.13 2925.06 501.13 2925.11 501.13 513.01 513.03 2925.12 513.01 513.04 2925.13 513.01 2925.13(A)-(D), (F) 513.05 2925.14 513.12 2925.141 513.121 2925.22 513.01 2925.23 513.01 2925.24 513.01 2925.31 513.01 513.07 2925.32 513.01 2925.33 513.11 2925.36 513.01 513.08 2925.37 513.01 2925.37(A), (G) 513.13 2925.38 513.07 513.121 2925.50 Ch. 513 2925.51 Ch. 513 513.14 2925.511 513.14 2925.64 513.15 2927.02 537.16 2927.11 541.07 2927.12 541.08 2927.17 533.14 ch. 2929 333.01 335.071 501.13 525.15 2929.01 333.01 335.071 537.02 537.021 537.03 537.09 549.13 2929.10(C), (D) Ch. 501 2929.14(A)(1) 549.13 2929.14(K) 549.12 2929.18 333.01 335.12 335.13 513.14 545.05 2929.18(B)(10) 525.15 2929.21-2929.28 333.01 335.01 335.02 335.05 335.06 335.072 335.073 335.074 2929.22 Ch. 501 501.99 2929.23 501.99 2929.24 303.99 333.01 501.99 537.03 2929.25 333.01 2929.26 335.01 335.02 335.05 335.06 335.072 335.073 335.074 2929.26(B) 501.99 2929.27 335.01 335.02 335.05 335.06 335.072 335.073 335.074 501.02 2929.28 303.99 331.44 333.01 335.01 335.02 335.05 335.06 335.07 335.071 335.072 335.073 335.074 335.12 335.13 335.14 501.02 513.14 537.03 545.05 2929.28(A) 501.99 2929.31 501.99 2929.37 501.99 2929.38 501.99 2933.21(E) Ch. 517 2935.01 501.99 525.16 537.03 2935.041 545.04 2935.10(B) 553.01 553.011 2935.26 et seq. Ch. 101 Ch. 303 Ch. 501 2935.27 335.074 2937.221 Ch. 335 2941.1416 333.01 2941.1423 537.03 2941.1424 549.12 2941.25 333.11 335.032 2945.37 525.01 2945.371 525.01 2945.38 525.01 2945.39 525.01 2945.40 525.01 2945.401 525.01 2945.402 525.01 2945.44 537.09 2945.71 549.02 2947.14 Ch. 101 2947.19 501.99 2947.23 501.99 ch. 2950 537.18 2950.01 549.13 2951.021 501.99 2953.37 549.04 2953.38 537.19 2967.01 537.03 549.13 2967.27 537.03 2971.01 537.051 537.08 537.17 ch. 2981 513.12 537.16 2981.04(D) 501.13 2981.06 501.13 2981.12 513.12 3103.06 533.01 3109.09 Ch. 541 3113.31 525.05 537.15 3123.58 335.071 335.074 3301.07 501.01 509.06 513.01 537.03 549.10 3301.071 537.03 3301.16 333.03 3301.32 331.38 3311.77 537.03 ch. 3314 501.01 3319.08 537.03 3319.22-3319.311 537.03 ch. 3332 509.06 3345.04 525.03 3345.12(A)(1) 509.06 3501.28, 3501.36 182.03 3517.01 525.01 3517.13 501.06 ch. 3701 1305.06 3701.01 537.03 3701.143 333.01 3701.82 521.02 3701.99(C) 521.02 ch. 3704 Ch. 1511 3704.03 1511.01 3704.11 1511.03 3704.11(C) Ch. 1511 ch. 3715 513.01 3715.01 513.01 3716.11 537.13 3716.99(C) 537.13 ch. 3719 513.01 513.03 513.04 513.08 513.11 513.12 3719.01 341.05 501.01 513.01 537.07 1519.01 3719.011 513.01 529.02 3719.011(A) Ch. 333 3719.05 513.10 3719.06 513.10 3719.07 513.09 3719.08 513.09 3719.13 513.10 3719.172(B), (E) 513.10 3719.19 Ch. 513 3719.31 513.10 3719.41 513.01 3719.43 513.01 3719.44 513.01 3719.70(B) Ch. 513 3719.99 513.09 513.10 ch. 3721 537.03 3721.071 Ch. 1501 3721.10(A) 522.03 3721.13(A)(18) 522.03 3723.02 1331.04 3727.01 537.03 ch. 3728 513.15 3728.01 513.15 3731.01 529.02 ch. 3733 1305.02 ch. 3734 501.09 501.13 521.08 1305.05 1305.06 3734.18 501.13 3735.31(D) 501.01 525.03 3737.01(C) Ch. 1501 3737.14 Ch. 1501 3737.24 et seq. Ch. 1501 3737.33 Ch. 1501 3737.34 Ch. 1501 3737.41 Ch. 1501 3737.42 Ch. 1501 ch. 3743 1311.08 1519.02 3737.44(A) Ch. 1501 3737.51(H) Ch. 1501 3737.62 Ch. 1511 3737.82 et seq. Ch. 1501 3737.82 521.02 549.01 3741.14 Ch. 1501 3743.01 549.01 1519.01 3743.02-3743.08 1519.01 1519.04 3743.06(F) Ch. 1519 3743.15-3743.21 1519.01 1519.04 3743.19(G) Ch. 1519 3743.27 Ch. 1501 3743.32 et seq. Ch. 1501 3743.40 1519.04 3743.44 1519.04 3743.45 1519.04 3743.50-3743.55 1519.01 3743.50-3743.55, 1519.02 1519.04 3743.53(B), (E) 1519.02 1519.03 3743.54 1519.02 1519.03 3743.55 1519.03 3743.56 1519.03 3743.64 1519.03 3743.65 1519.04 3743.68 Ch. 1519 3743.80 549.01 1519.05 3743.99(C) 1519.99 3761.16 Ch. 509 ch. 3767 513.05 517.03 517.04 Ch. 521 3767.13 521.09 3767.20 et seq. Ch. 951 3767.29 521.01 3767.32 521.08 3767.99(C) 521.08 ch. 3769 517.01 ch. 3770 182.03 517.01 3770.21 182.03 ch. 3772 517.01 3772.01 182.03 517.01 ch. 3781 1311.03 1311.04 1311.08 1311.09 3781.01 Ch. 1311 3781.03 Ch. 1311 3781.031 Ch. 1311 3781.04 Ch. 1311 3781.06 Ch. 1311 1311.03 1325.02 3781.061 1311.03 3781.10(E) Ch. 1311 3781.10 521.02 1311.08 3781.102 Ch. 1311 3781.103 Ch. 1311 3781.104 Ch. 1311 3781.105 Ch. 1311 1331.04 3781.108 Ch. 1311 3781.11 1311.08 3781.11(A) Ch. 1311 3781.11(D) Ch. 1519 3781.111(C) 351.04 3781.12 Ch. 1311 3781.15 1311.07 3781.19 Ch. 1311 ch. 3791 1311.03 3791.01 1311.04 3791.02 1311.04 3791.03 1311.04 3791.04 Ch. 1311 1311.04 3791.04(B) 1311.03 3791.041 et seq. Ch. 1311 3791.11 et seq. Ch. 1311 3791.21 Ch. 1311 3929.43 545.07 3937.18 501.99 3937.41 537.03 4104.02 1311.08 4105.011 1311.08 ch. 4123 Ch. 155 4123.271 182.63 ch. 4301 529.02 529.021 545.13 4301.01 529.01 1519.01 4301.01(B)(1) Ch. 333 4301.171 529.07 4301.22 529.03 4301.22(A)(1) 529.02 4301.22(D) Ch. 529 4301.251 Ch. 509 4301.32 et seq. Ch. 529 4301.62 529.07 4301.63 529.021 4301.631 529.06 4301.633 529.021 4301.634 529.021 4301.64 529.04 4301.69 529.02 4301.82 529.07 4301.99 335.074 529.02 529.021 529.03 529.04 529.06 4301.99(A) 529.07 ch. 4303 517.14 529.05 549.02 4303.201 529.07 4303.25 529.05 4303.29 Ch. 529 4313.02 182.03 182.61 4501.01 185.03 333.01 337.27 337.29 339.03 341.01 371.12 375.01 533.091 537.17 545.01 545.18 1123.01 4501.01(A) 513.05 4501.01(F) 303.10 4501.01(TT) 371.12 4501.07 331.46 4501.11 335.07 4501.21 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.30 335.31 335.32 4501.25 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.30 335.31 335.32 ch. 4503 Ch. 335 335.10 1145.06 ch. 4503, ch. 4561 375.01 4503.02 335.16 4503.03 335.15 4503.036 335.15 4503.038 335.15 4503.04 335.16 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.31 335.32 4503.042 335.15 335.16 4503.07 335.16 4503.10 185.02 185.05 335.15 335.16 4503.102 335.15 4503.103 335.15 4503.11 335.10 335.16 4503.12 335.15 4503.12(A), (A)(4), (D) 335.11 4503.13 335.29 4503.16 335.16 4503.17 335.16 4503.172 335.16 4503.173 335.16 4503.18 335.16 4503.181 337.24 4503.182 335.09 335.15 335.33 545.03 4503.19 335.09 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.30 335.31 335.32 4503.191 335.09 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.31 335.32 373.10 4503.21 335.09 4503.22 545.03 4503.231 333.01 335.071 4503.233 333.01 333.10 335.05 335.07 335.071 4503.234 333.01 333.10 335.05 335.07 335.071 4503.235 335.05 4503.236 333.10 4503.24 335.15 529.07 4503.40 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.31 335.32 4503.41 335.16 351.04 4503.42 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.31 335.32 4503.43 335.16 4503.44 351.04 4503.46 335.16 4503.49 301.27 4503.65 339.12 4503.77 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.32 4503.78 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.32 4503.87 335.17 4503.97 335.22 4503.495 335.18 4503.528 335.23 4503.529 335.24 4503.536 335.28 4503.538 335.29 4503.555 335.31 4503.565 335.19 4503.571 335.16 4503.577 335.25 4503.592 335.26 4503.715 335.20 4503.763 335.21 4503.902 335.32 4503.903 335.27 4503.904 335.30 Ch. 4504 335.17 335.18 335.19 335.20 335.21 335.22 335.23 335.24 335.25 335.26 335.27 335.28 335.29 335.30 335.31 335.32 4504.02 339.12 4504.03 335.16 4504.06 Ch. 185 185.01 339.12 4504.15 339.12 4504.16 339.12 4504.17 339.12 4504.171 339.12 4504.172 185.01 339.12 4504.201 339.12 4504.24 335.16 339.12 ch. 4505 335.08 335.09 ch. 4505, ch. 4517 335.08 4505.01 185.03 4505.06, subch. IV 335.08 4505.061 335.15 4505.07 545.03 4505.101 303.082 4505.18 335.08 ch. 4506 335.01 335.02 341.01 373.10 375.05 4506.01 333.01 341.01 4506.02 341.02 4506.03 341.03 4506.04 341.04 4506.06(B) 341.03 4506.08 335.15 4506.09 341.01 4506.10 335.07 4506.13 341.03 4506.15 341.05 4506.16 Ch. 341 335.071 4506.17 341.05 4506.20 341.06 4506.24 341.03 4506.25(A) 549.04 ch. 4507 Ch. 335 335.01 335.02 335.06 335.071 373.10 375.05 4507.01(A) 545.03 4507.02 335.02 335.07 335.071 4507.03 335.01 4507.04 335.01 4507.05 335.01 335.03 335.031 373.02 4507.071 335.031 4507.08 335.04 4507.081 335.04 4507.10 537.02 4507.13 373.02 4507.14 335.01 335.07 4507.16 Ch. 303 Ch. 341 4507.24 335.15 4507.30 335.04 4507.34 Ch. 303 4507.35 335.06 4507.40 Ch. 303 4507.50-4507.52 537.16 4507.50 335.15 545.09 4507.52 335.15 4507.99 335.02 ch. 4509 335.05 335.072 4509.01 333.01 335.07 335.071 335.072 335.074 335.12 335.13 335.14 375.01 4509.01(J) Ch. 335 4509.101 335.072 4509.102 335.072 4509.37 335.072 4509.40 335.072 4509.45 335.072 4509.05 335.15 4509.06 Ch. 335 4509.74 Ch. 335 ch. 4510 Ch. 335 335.05 537.02 537.021 545.05 4510.01 333.01 4510.02 331.38 333.01 333.02 335.01 335.05 335.07 335.071 335.073 335.12 335.13 533.09 537.02 537.021 549.10 4510.02(A)(5) 303.01 335.12 335.13 4510.02(A)(6) 529.021 533.09 4510.02(A)(7) 545.05 4510.021 303.01 333.01 335.071 4510.032 335.074 4510.036 333.03 Ch. 335 373.01 4510.037 335.07 4510.07 335.071 537.02 4510.11 335.07 335.072 335.074 4510.111 335.07 335.072 335.074 4510.12 335.01 4510.13 333.01 4510.14 335.071 4510.15 333.02 4510.16 335.07 335.072 335.074 4510.161 335.071 4510.21(A) 335.073 4510.22 335.074 4510.33 335.074 ch. 4511 305.01 331.16 4511.01 301.05 301.031 337.26 341.01 375.01 501.01 513.11 529.07 537.07 549.04 4511.01(A) 301.51 4511.01(B) 301.20 4511.01(C) 301.19 4511.01(D) 301.11 4511.01(E) 301.27 4511.01(E)(1), (3), (4) 313.11 4511.01(F) 301.35 4511.01(G) 301.04 4511.01(I) 301.07 4511.01(J) 301.02 4511.01(K) 301.49 4511.01(L) 301.05 4511.01(M) 301.48 4511.01(N) 301.36 4511.01(O) 301.24 4511.01(P) 301.28 4511.01(Q) 301.30 4511.01(T) 301.12 4511.01(U) 301.14 4511.01(V) 301.16 4511.01(W) 301.23 4511.01(X) 301.22 4511.01(Y) 301.10 4511.01(Z) 301.25 4511.01(BB) 301.42 4511.01(CC) 301.08 4511.01(DD) 301.26 4511.01(EE) 301.33 4511.01(FF) 301.37 4511.01(GG) 301.18 4511.01(HH) 301.43 4511.01(II) 301.04 4511.01(JJ) 301.38 4511.01(KK) 301.17 4511.01(LL) 301.09 4511.01(MM) 301.34 4511.01(NN) 301.06 4511.01(OO) 301.31 4511.01(PP) 301.50 4511.01(QQ) 301.46 4511.01(RR) 301.47 4511.01(SS) 301.29 4511.01(TT) 301.45 4511.01(UU) 301.32 4511.01(XX) 301.03 4511.01(YY) 301.15 4511.01(ZZ) 301.13 4511.01(AAA) 301.44 4511.01(BBB) 301.41 4511.01(CCC) 301.42 4511.01(EEE) 301.52 4511.01(FFF) 301.35 4511.01(HHH) 301.201 4511.01(III) 301.251 4511.01(JJJ) 301.321 4511.01(KKK) 301.031 4511.01(MMM) 301.162 4511.01(NNN) 301.181 4511.01(OOO) 301.26 4511.01(QQQ) 301.161 4511.01(PPP) 301.361 4511.01-4511.76 301.251 4511.011 Ch. 305 4511.03 301.251 331.20 4511.031 313.11 4511.04 303.04 4511.041 303.041 4511.042 303.041 4511.05 303.05 4511.051 301.251 303.06 4511.051(A) 371.06 4511.06 Ch. 303 4511.07 305.01 4511.07(C) Ch. 311 4511.07(E) Ch. 955 4511.071 Ch. 351 305.05 4511.09 Ch. 305 305.02 313.10 337.10 4511.10 Ch. 305 4511.11 Ch. 305 4511.12 301.251 4511.12 303.041 313.01 4511.13 303.041 313.03 4511.131 303.041 313.04 4511.132 301.251 303.041 313.09 4511.14 303.041 313.05 4511.15 313.06 4511.16 301.251 313.07 4511.17 313.08 4511.17(A)-(D) 301.251 4511.18 313.10 4511.181 333.01 341.05 4511.19 333.01 335.05 335.071 341.05 513.05 513.06 513.07 513.08 513.12 513.121 4511.19(A) 335.03 4511.191 333.01 335.071 341.05 4511.191-4511.197 537.07 4511.192 333.01 4511.193 333.01 4511.194 333.01 4511.196 335.071 4511.20 301.251 333.02 4511.201 301.251 333.02 4511.202 303.041 333.08 4511.203 335.05 4511.204 333.11 4511.205 335.032 4511.21 Ch. 333 301.251 303.041 Ch. 305 333.03 537.02 4511.211 301.251 303.041 313.07 4511.213 301.251 333.031 4511.214 301.251 4511.22 301.251 303.041 4511.22(A) Ch. 305 4511.22(B) Ch. 333 333.04 4511.23 301.251 303.041 Ch. 305 333.05 4511.24 333.06 301.251 4511.25 301.251 303.041 331.01 4511.251 333.07 4511.26 301.251 303.041 331.02 4511.27 301.251 303.041 331.03 4511.28 301.251 303.041 331.04 4511.29 301.251 303.041 331.05 4511.30 301.251 303.041 331.06 4511.31 301.251 303.041 331.07 4511.32 301.251 303.041 331.30 4511.33 301.251 303.041 331.08 4511.34 301.251 303.041 331.09 4511.35 301.251 303.041 331.31 4511.36 301.251 303.041 331.10 4511.37 301.251 303.041 331.12 4511.38 301.251 303.041 331.13 4511.39 301.251 303.041 331.14 4511.40 301.251 303.041 331.15 4511.41 301.251 303.041 331.16 4511.42 301.251 303.041 331.17 4511.43 301.251 303.041 4511.43(A) 331.19 4511.43(B) 331.18 4511.431 301.251 303.041 331.23 4511.432 301.251 303.041 313.07 4511.44 301.251 303.041 331.22 4511.441 301.251 303.041 371.07 4511.45 331.21 4511.45(A) 335.33 4511.451 301.251 331.24 4511.452 301.251 371.08 4511.454 331.21 335.33 4511.46 301.251 371.01 4511.47 301.251 371.02 4511.48 301.251 371.03 4511.481 301.251 371.09 4511.49 301.251 371.04 4511.491 371.11 4511.50 301.251 371.05 4511.51 371.06 4511.51(A) 301.251 4511.511 301.251 371.10 4511.512 371.12 4511.513 301.22 301.51 331.45 4511.52 373.01 4511.521 Ch. 335 Ch. 337 337.02 337.18 373.10 4511.53 301.251 373.02 4511.54 301.251 373.03 4511.55 301.251 4511.55(A) 373.07 4511.55(B) 373.04 4511.56 301.251 373.05 373.06 4511.57 301.251 303.041 4511.58 301.251 303.041 4511.59 301.251 303.041 4511.60 301.251 303.041 331.29 4511.61(D), (E) 331.40 4511.61 301.251 303.041 Ch. 305 313.03 331.40 4511.61-4511.63 341.05 4511.62 303.041 313.03 331.39 4511.63 331.40 4511.64 301.251 4511.65 Ch. 305 313.02 4511.66 301.251 303.04 303.041 351.12 4511.661 301.251 351.07 4511.67 351.01 4511.68 301.251 303.041 351.03 4511.681 303.041 351.13 4511.69 303.041 351.04 4511.70 301.251 4511.70(A), (B), (D) 331.25 4511.70(C) 351.08 4511.701 301.251 331.35 4511.71 301.251 331.26 4511.711 301.251 4511.712 301.251 331.33 4511.713 301.251 373.11 4511.714 331.44 4511.72 301.251 331.27 4511.73 301.251 331.28 4511.74 301.251 311.01 4511.75 331.38 4511.76 331.40 4511.761 331.40 4511.762 331.40 4511.763 301.251 4511.764 331.40 4511.77 331.38 331.40 4511.771 301.251 331.38 4511.78 301.251 4511.79 331.40 4511.81 337.26 4511.82 331.42 4511.84 301.251 331.43 4511.98 333.03 4511.99 313.04 313.05 333.01 371.11 ch. 4513 305.01 4513.01-4513.37 339.01 4513.02 337.01 4513.03 337.02 4513.03(A)(1) 373.02 4513.04 337.03 4513.05 337.04 4513.06 337.05 4513.07 337.06 4513.071 337.24 4513.08 337.07 4513.09 337.08 4513.10 337.09 4513.11 337.10 4513.12 337.11 4513.13 337.12 4513.14 337.13 4513.15 337.14 4513.16 337.15 4513.17 337.16 4513.171 303.041 331.21 4513.182 337.16 4513.19 337.17 337.24 4513.20 337.18 4513.21 337.19 4513.22 337.20 4513.23 337.21 4513.24 337.22 4513.241 337.28 4513.261 337.30 4513.263 335.03 335.031 337.26 337.27 4513.263(A)(2) 371.06 4513.28 Ch. 337 Ch. 341 4513.29 339.06 4513.30 337.23 4513.31 339.08 4513.32 339.07 4513.33 Ch. 339 4513.34 339.01 4513.361 303.11 4513.60 et seq. 303.08 4513.60 303.081 4513.60 303.082 4513.601 303.082 4513.61-4513.65 303.081 4513.61-4613.65 303.082 4513.62 et seq. Ch. 303 4513.62 303.081 4513.63 303.08 303.081 303.09 4513.63(B)-(E) 303.10 4513.64 303.09 4513.65 303.10 4513.71 331.21 4513.99 303.99 337.01 337.09 337.18 337.23 337.29 339.01 339.06 339.07 339.08 ch. 4517 335.09 4517.01 337.28 ch. 4519 375.08 4519.01 373.02 4519.01(A) 375.01 4519.01(B) 375.01 4519.01(C) 375.01 4519.02(B), (C), (D) 375.06 4519.03 375.06 335.15 4519.04 375.06 4519.05 335.15 4519.10 335.15 4519.20 375.02 375.04 4519.40 375.03 4519.40(A) 375.04 4519.41 375.04 4519.42 375.07 4519.43 375.07 4519.44 375.05 4519.46 375.07 4519.47 Ch. 375 541.05 4519.48 Ch. 375 4519.51-4519.70 375.08 4519.56 335.15 4519.66 375.08 4519.69 335.15 4549.02 335.12 4549.021 335.13 4549.03 335.14 4549.05 303.03 4549.08 335.11 4549.11 335.10 4549.12 335.10 4549.13 Ch. 303 4549.15 Ch. 303 4549.65 335.05 4582.04 501.01 525.03 4582.28 501.01 525.03 ch. 4715 513.03 513.11 513.12 4723.32 537.03 ch. 4723 537.03 ch. 4725 337.28 ch. 4729 513.01 513.03 513.04 513.08 513.11 513.12 4729.01 341.01 513.01 529.02 545.01 545.18 4729.02 513.01 4729.041 333.01 ch. 4730 513.03 513.04 513.08 513.12 ch. 4731 337.26 337.27 337.28 513.03 513.04 513.08 513.11 513.12 4731.22 525.05 ch. 4734 337.26 337.27 4737.012 545.05 545.18 4737.04 545.05 545.18 4737.05-4737.12 303.10 4731.41 513.15 4740.07 1331.04 ch. 4741 505.071 513.03 513.04 513.08 513.11 513.12 525.15 4741.01 505.071 ch. 4765 513.11 4765.01 333.01 517.01 537.03 ch. 4905 341.03 ch. 4906 1305.05 4907.47 335.16 ch. 4921 341.03 ch. 4923 341.03 4923.01 341.01 4923.04 333.031 4923.06 333.031 4927.01 182.66 4931.31 537.11 4931.40(F)(1) 545.01 4939.05(B)(4) 953.05 4999.02 553.02 4999.04 553.03 5104.01 301.35 5104.011 337.26 ch. 5119 333.01 5119.21 333.01 5119.36 525.05 5119.38 333.01 5147.30 501.99 525.01 5149.03(B) 525.01 5164.01 525.01 5501.27 537.02 537.021 5502.11 Ch. 335 5502.1321 331.46 5503.34 301.27 549.04 5511.02 331.03 375.01 ch. 5516 Ch. 1151 5577.01-5577.09 303.04 339.01 5577.05 339.03 5577.11 339.05 5577.14 Ch. 339 Ch. 341 5577.99 339.03 5589.08 339.10 5589.081 339.11 5589.21 553.01 5589.211 553.011 5589.99 339.10 339.11 553.011 tit. LVII 182.03 ch. 5701 182.03 Ch. 5703 182.60 182.61 182.66 182.69 5703.052 182.71 5703.056 182.03 182.17 5703.21 182.63 5703.37 182.70 182.71 5703.47 182.68 182.67 182.70 182.71 182.053 5703.60 182.70 5703.70 182.71 5717.011 182.18 5727.01 339.07 5727.01 182.66 5727.24, 5727.30 182.03 5739.02 517.01 5743.71 525.02 ch. 5745 182.062 182.61 Ch. 182 5745.03 181.01 ch. 5747 Ch. 181 5747.01 182.03 5747.17 182.053 5907.02 501.01 525.03 6101.04 Ch. 1305 ch. 6111 521.08 6111.032 1311.03 6111.13 Ch. 921  
