SYCAMORE TOWNSHIP CIC, INC.
CODE OF REGULATIONS
ARTICLE ONE: NAME
The name of this corporation shall be the “Sycamore Township CIC, Inc.” (“Corporation”).
ARTICLE TWO: PURPOSE
The Corporation has been organized under Chapter XVII of the Ohio Revised Code to
operate exclusively for charitable purposes by advancing, encouraging, and promoting the
industrial, economic, commercial, and civic development of Sycamore Township, Hamilton
County, Ohio.
ARTICLE THREE: LOCATION
The principal office of the Corporation, at which the general business of the Corporation
will be transacted and where the records of the Corporation will be kept, will be at such place in
the State of Ohio as may be fixed from time to time by the Board of Directors. Unless otherwise
fixed, it will be at 8540 Kenwood Road, Cincinnati, Ohio 45236.
ARTICLE FOUR: BASIC POLICIES
The following are basic policies of this Corporation:
Section 1: The Corporation shall be noncommercial, nonsectarian, and nonpartisan.
Section 2: The Corporation shall not, directly or indirectly, participate or intervene (in
any way, including the publishing or distributing of statements) in any
political campaign on behalf of, or opposition to, any candidate for any
public office.
Section 3: The Corporation may work with the Board of Township Trustees of
Sycamore Township or any committees or employees of Sycamore
Township to further the purposes of the Corporation.
Section 4: The Corporation may cooperate with and support other organizations and
agencies supporting Sycamore Township, but persons representing the
Corporation in such matters shall make no commitments that bind the
Corporation.
Section 5: No part of the net earnings of the Corporation shall inure to the benefit of,
or be distributed to its members, Directors, officers, or other private persons
except that the Corporation shall be authorized and empowered to pay
reasonable compensation for services rendered and to make payments and
distributions in furtherance of the purposes set forth in ARTICLE TWO
hereof.
Section 6: Notwithstanding any other provision of these articles, the Corporation shall
not carry on any other activities not permitted to be carried on by an
organization exempt from Federal Income Tax under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
ARTICLE FIVE: MEMBERS
Members of the Corporation will consist only of the members of the Board of Township
Trustees of Sycamore Township, the Sycamore Township Fiscal Officer and the Sycamore
Township Administrator. Members may vote either in person or by proxy.
ARTICLE SIX: MEETINGS OF MEMBERS
Section 1: Annual Meeting: The annual meeting of the members of the Corporation
shall be held, at such date, time and place (which shall be within Hamilton
County, Ohio) as may be fixed by the Board of Directors, provided that if
such Board does not fix such date, time and place by the fifteenth day of
February, then the President of the Corporation shall do so. The annual
meeting shall be noticed in accordance with the provision for minimum
public notice as enumerated with Section 121.22(F) of the Ohio Revised
Code or as otherwise specified herein.
Section 2: Special Meetings: Special Meetings of the members may be called and the
time, date and place (which shall be within Hamilton County, Ohio) of the
meetings specified, by the President, the Executive Committee, or any three
members of the Board of Directors. Special meetings shall be noticed in
accordance with the provisions for minimum public notice, as enumerated
within Section 121.22(F) of the Ohio Revised Code or as otherwise
specified herein.
Upon the receipt of a request in writing for a special meeting that states the
purpose or purposes of the meeting, delivered either in person or by
registered mail to the President or the Secretary by any person(s) entitled to
call a meeting of the members, such officer shall promptly give notice of
such meeting as provided in Section 3 hereof. If such notice is not given
within 15 days after the delivery or making of such request, the person(s)
calling the meeting may fix the time of meeting and give notice thereof as 
provided in Section 3 hereof or cause such notice to be given by any
designated representative.
Section 3: Notice of Meetings Public notice of each meeting of members, stating the
time, place and purposes of the meeting shall be given in advance of the
date of the meeting by or at the direction of the President, the Secretary or
any other person required or permitted by these Regulations to give the
notice, with such notice distributed and formulated pursuant to Ohio
Revised Code Section 121.22. Notice of the continuance of a meeting need
not be given if the time and place to which it is continued are fixed and
announced at the meeting.
Verbal and/or written notice may also be distributed to each respective
member of the Corporation through regular mail, registered mail, telephone,
voice messaging, electronic mail, or other acceptable means of
communication, as provided for in Article VIII of these regulations, at least
24 hours in advance of the scheduled meeting date and time.
Section 4: Waiver of Notice: Individual notice of the time, place and purposes of any
meeting of the members may be waived in writing by any member, either
before or after the holding of such meeting. Such writing shall be filed with
or entered upon the records of the meeting. The attendance of a member at
any meeting without protesting, prior to or at the commencement of the
meeting, the lack of proper notice shall be deemed to be a waiver by the
member of notice of the meeting.
Section 5: Quorum: A majority of the membership, and such members must be present
at any meeting of the members, shall constitute a quorum for such meeting.
A majority of the members present at a meeting, whether or not a quorum
is present, may adjourn such meeting from time to time without notice other
than announcement at the meeting of the place, date and hour of the
adjourned meeting. At an adjourned meeting, the Corporation may transact
any business which might have been transacted at the original meeting.
Section 6: Voting: When a quorum is present at any meeting, except as otherwise
expressly required by statute, the Articles of Incorporation or these
Regulations, a majority of the votes cast by the members at a meeting of
members shall control. Each member shall be entitled to one vote upon
each matter properly submitted to the members for their vote at a meeting
of members.
Section 7: Executive Session: The members may hold an executive session for the
purposes set forth in Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22(G).
ARTICLE SEVEN: BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Section 1: The number of members of the Board of Directors of this Corporation will
be five (5). The members of the Corporation may determine to have a
greater number, but the Board shall always consist of an odd number of
Directors.
Section 2: Election: So long as the Corporation is appointed as the agent for the
economic development of Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio,
the composition of Directors shall comply with the Ohio laws for an
organization designated as an agent of political subdivision which under
Ohio Revised Code Section 1724.10, currently requires that at least twofifths of the Directors shall consist of appointed or elected officials of
Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio). No reduction in the number
of Directors shall have the effect of shortening the term of any incumbent
Directors.
The election of Directors shall take place at the annual meeting of the
members or at a special meeting of the members called for that purpose.
The Directors shall be elected by a majority of the members.
Section 3: Terms of Directors: The Directors shall be divided into two groups.
(a) The first group shall consist of Directors who are elected officials of
Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio. Each of the Directors in the
first group shall hold office from the date of his or her taking office as a
Sycamore Township elected official until such person’s term in office
expires or until such Director’s earlier resignation, removal from office or
death. Any member of this first group shall be deemed to have resigned as
of the date he or she is no longer a publicly elected official.
(b) The second group shall consist of all other Directors who are not elected
public officials of Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio. Each of
the Directors in the second group shall hold office until the next election of
Directors and until such Directors successor is elected, or until such
Director’s earlier resignation, removal from office or death.
Section 4: Place of Meetings: All meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held at
the principal office of the Corporation or at such place as may be designated
from time to time by a majority of the Directors, or as may be designated in
the notice or in the waiver of notice of such meeting.
Section 5: Organizational Meetings: An organizational meeting of the Board of
Directors may be held, without call or notice, immediately following each
annual meeting of the members of this Corporation or at such alternative
time as may be provided in a notice of meeting.
Section 6: Other Meetings Notice: Other meetings of the Board of Directors may be
held at any time on the call of the President, the Executive Committee or
any two Directors. Public notice of any such meeting shall be distributed
and formulated pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22, and as
further distributed as required by Article II of these regulations. The notice
shall state the time and place but need not state the purposes of the meeting.
If the Secretary fails or refuses to give such notice promptly, the notice may
be given by the person who called the meeting. Notice of adjournment of a
meeting of the Board of Directors need not be given if the time and place to
which it is adjourned are fixed and announced at such meeting.
Verbal and/or written notice shall also be distributed to each respective
member of the Corporation through regular mail, registered mail, telephone,
and/or electronic mail, as applicable, at least 24 hours in advance of the
scheduled meeting date and time.
Section 7: Waiver of Notice: Notice of the time and place of any meeting of the Board
of Directors may be waived in writing, either before or after the meeting
takes place, by any Directors, which writing shall be filed with or entered
upon the records of the meeting. The attendance of any Director at any
meeting without protesting, prior to or at the commencement of the meeting,
the lack of proper notice, shall be deemed to be a waiver by such Director
of notice of the meeting.
Section 8: Quorum: A majority of the whole authorized number of Directors is
necessary to constitute a quorum for a meeting of the Board of Directors
provided the Directors present at any meeting, although less than a quorum,
may adjourn the meeting.
Section 9: Voting: The act of a majority of the Directors present at a meeting at which
a quorum is present is the act of the Board of Directors, except as otherwise
provided by law, the Articles of Incorporation or these Regulations.
Section 10: Removal: The members may remove any Director, with or without cause,
by simple majority vote of the membership, with such vote conducted as
provided herein.
Section 11: Vacancies: The members may fill any vacancy that may occur in the Board
of Directors by election of a successor to hold office during the unexpired
term of the vacant Director position.
Section 12: Compensation: No compensation will be paid to any member of the Board
of Directors for services as a member of the Board. By Resolution of the
Board, reasonable expenses incurred in the course of carrying out the
mission of the Corporation may be allowed.
ARTICLE EIGHT: OFFICERS
Section 1: Definition of Officers: The Board of Directors shall elect a President, Vice
President, Secretary and Treasurer. It may also elect, in its discretion, an
Executive Director and such other officers and agents as the Board of
Directors may determine. All officers shall be elected by the Directors, and
they shall hold office for such period, with such authority and perform such
duties as the Board of Directors may from time to time determine. Any two
or more offices may be held by the same person, but no officer shall execute,
acknowledge, or verify any instrument in more than one capacity if such
instrument is required by law, the Articles of Incorporation or these
Regulations to be executed, acknowledged or verified by two or more
officers.
Section 2: Election, Term, Eligibility and Removal: The officers of the Corporation
shall be elected annually by the Board of Directors at its annual meeting or
at a special meeting held for such purpose. New or additional officers may
be elected at any meeting or at a special meeting held for such purpose.
New or additional officers may be elected at any meeting of the Board of
Directors. Each officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Directors,
and each officer shall hold office until his or her successor is chosen or until
his or her death, resignation or removal. Only the President and Vice
President need be a member of the Board of Directors. Any officer may be
removed, with or without cause, by the Board of Directors without prejudice
to the contract rights of such officer.
Section 3: Vacancies: If any office shall become vacant by reason of death,
resignation, removal or otherwise, the Board of Directors shall elect a
successor to fill such office.
ARTICLE NINE: DUTIES OF OFFICERS:
Section 1: President: The President shall preside at meetings of the Members, the
Board of Directors, and may designate the date, time and place of meetings
of the Members and Board of Directors as provided herein, and may execute
all authorized instruments, including without limitation contracts, bonds,
notes, debentures, deeds, mortgages and other obligations in the name of
the Corporation and shall perform such other duties as the Board of
Directors may require.
Section 2: Vice President: In case of the absence or disability of the President, or when
circumstances prevent the President from acting, the Vice President, if any,
shall perform all of the duties of the President, and in such case shall have 
all of the powers and obligations of the President, and any such instruments
so executed by the Vice President shall be as valid and binding as though
executed by the President. The Vice President shall also perform such other
duties as the Board of Directors may require.
Section 3: Secretary: The Secretary shall take and keep records of all meetings of the
members and of the Board of Directors, conduct such correspondence of the
Corporation as may be designated by the President, perform the usual duties
of his office and perform such other duties as the Board may require.
Section 4: Treasurer: The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds and securities
in other corporations and similar property belonging to the Corporation and
shall do with the same as may be ordered by the Board of Directors. He
shall keep accurate financial accounts and hold the same open for
examination of the Directors. On the expiration of his term of office he
shall turn over to his successor or to the Board of Directors, all property,
books, papers and moneys of the Corporation in his hands.
Section 5: Assistant(s): The Board of Directors may also elect for a term of one year
one or more Assistant Secretaries, and one or more Assistant Treasurers,
who shall perform the duties of the Secretary and Treasurer, respectively,
in the case of the absence or disability of such Secretary or Treasurer,
together with such duties as the Board of Directors may from time to time
prescribe. The power of such officers to execute all authorized deeds,
mortgages, bonds, notes, contracts, and other like powers of the Secretary
and Treasurer, respectively, and any such instrument so executed by an
Assistant Secretary or Assistant Treasurer shall be as valid and binding as
though executed by the Secretary or Treasurer, as the case may be. Such
other officers as the Board of Directors may elect, shall have such powers
and duties as the Board of Directors may from time to time prescribe.
Section 6: Executive Director: The Executive Director, when elected, shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Corporation. He shall be responsible for
supervising the property and business affairs of the Corporation subject to
the direction of the Board of Directors. He may execute all authorized
instruments, including without limitation, contracts, bonds, notes,
debentures, deeds, mortgages and other obligations in the name of the
Corporation and shall perform such other duties as the Board of Directors
may require.
Section 7: Delegation of Authority: The Board of Directors is authorized to delegate
the duties of any officer to any other officer and generally to control the
action of the officers and to require the performance of duties in addition to
those mentioned herein.
Section 8: Bond: Any officer, if required by the Board of Directors, shall give bond
in such form and with such security as the Board of Directors from time to
time may require for the faithful performance of his duties.
Section 9: Depositories: The Board of Directors shall select depositories for the
safekeeping of the moneys of the Corporation and establish the procedure
for deposit and the Board of Directors from time to time may authorize
investment of such moneys of the Corporation as are not then required, in
any obligations in which a township is authorized to invest by the applicable
sections of the Ohio Revised Code.
ARTICLE TEN: COMMITTEES
Section 1: Committees: The Board of Directors may create an executive committee or
other committees of no fewer than three member Directors. Such
committees shall have and may exercise such powers of the Board of
Directors in the management of the Corporation as may be conferred or
authorized by the resolutions appointing them; however, no committee shall
have the power to fill vacancies among the Directors or in any committee.
The Board of Directors shall have the power at any time to fill vacancies in,
to change the membership of, or to discharge any such committee.
Such committees shall act only during the intervals between meetings of the
Board of Directors and subject to the direction of the Board of Directors.
Acts of any committee within the authority delegated to it shall be effective
for all purposes as the act or authorization of the Directors. A majority of
the members of any committee may fix the time and place of its meetings.
Committee members may participate at meetings by means of
communications equipment if all participants can hear each other, and such
participation shall constitute presence at the meeting. Such committees may
act by a majority of their respective members at meetings or by a writing or
writings signed by all members of such committee. All committees at all
times shall be subject to the control and direction of the Board of Directors
and shall report all actions taken at the next succeeding meeting of the Board
of Directors.
Section 2: Executive Committee: The Executive Committee of the Board of Directors
shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) At any meeting of the Board of Directors, it may designate an Executive
Committee consisting of such number of Directors as the Board from time
to time determines. The President shall be a member of and shall serve as
Chairman of the Executive Committee.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by the Board of Directors, the Executive
Committee shall meet at such times and places as it shall determine. The
call of such meetings and the giving of notices thereof shall be in a manner
established by such Committee. At any meeting of the said Committee a
quorum shall consist of a majority of the members, but the affirmative vote
of a majority of all members of the Committee shall be necessary to the
taking of any action by the Committee.
(c) The Executive Committee may adopt by-laws or regulations to provide
that such by-laws or regulations shall not be contrary to the by-laws or
regulations or resolutions adopted by the Board of Directors, this Code of
Regulations or the Articles of Incorporation.
(d) The executive Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Directors and during the intervals between meetings of the Board shall
possess and may exercise such powers of the Board as may be delegated
from time to time by the Board to it, provided that the Executive Committee
shall not be empowered to fill vacancies in the Board of Directors or offices
of the Corporation, not to fill vacancies in or add to its own membership.
(e) The Executive Committee shall report its actions at the next meeting of
the Board of Directors.
ARTICLE ELEVEN: INDEMNIFICATION
Section 1: The Corporation shall indemnify its members, Directors and officers to the
full extent permitted by the Nonprofit Corporation Law of Ohio and O.R.C.
2744.07. The Corporation may, to such extent and in such manner as is
determined by the Board of Directors , but in no event to an extent greater
than is permitted by the Nonprofit Corporation Law of Ohio, indemnify any
employees or agents of the Corporation permitted to be indemnified by
provisions of the Nonprofit Corporation Law of Ohio. The Corporation
may, but shall not be obligated to, maintain insurance at its expense to
protect itself and any such person against any such liability, cost or expense.
ARTICLE TWELVE: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 1: Fiscal Year: The fiscal year of the Corporation shall end on such date as
the Board of Directors may determine from time to time. In the absence of
such a determination, the fiscal year shall end on the 31st day of December.
Section 2: Notice: Whenever provisions of law, the Articles of Incorporation or
these Regulations require notice to be given to any Directors or members,
personal or hand delivery of such notice shall not be required. Any such 
notice may be given in writing, by mail (by deposit in a post office or letter
box, in an envelope with postage affixed), by courier, by overnight package
delivery, by telegraph, email or by telecopier, in any case addressed to such
Director or members at such address as appears on the records of the
Corporation. Notice given by anyone of the above methods shall be
sufficient; and the method of giving notice to all Directors or to all
members, as the case may be, need not be uniform. If otherwise permitted
by these Regulations, notice to Directors may also be given by telephone
call. Such notice shall be deemed to be given at the time when it is so
mailed, or delivered to a courier, an overnight package delivery company
or a telegraph company, or, in the case of a telecopy, when transmission has
been confirmed. In computing the period of time for the giving of notice,
the day on which notice is given shall be excluded, and the day when the
act for which notice is given is to be done is included, unless the instrument
calling for the notice otherwise provides.
Section 3: Records and Meetings: The Corporation is a public body for purposes of
Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22 and all meetings will be open to the
public, with the limitations set forth in Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22.
public notice of such meetings will be provided as required by Ohio Revised
Code Section 121.22. Requests for records shall be submitted and fulfilled
in accordance with the policies and procedures established within the
Sycamore Township Public Records Policy, as amended.
ARTICLE THIRTEEN: CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY
Section 1: Purpose: The purpose of the conflict of interest policy is to protect this taxexempt organization’s (Organization) interest when it is contemplating
entering into a transaction or arrangement that might benefit the private
interest of an officer or Director of the Organization or might result in a
possible excess benefit transaction. This policy is intended to supplement
but not replace any applicable state and federal laws governing conflict of
interest applicable to nonprofit and charitable organizations.
Section 2: Definitions:
(a) Interested Person: Any Director, principal officer, or member of a
committee with governing board delegated powers, who has a direct or
indirect financial interest, as defined below, is an interested person.
(b) Financial Interest: A person has a financial interest if the person has,
directly or indirectly, through business, investment, or family:
(1) An ownership or investment interest in any entity with which
the Organization has a transaction or arrangement,
(2) A compensation arrangement with the Organization or with any
entity or individual with which the Organization has a transaction or
arrangement, or
(3) A potential ownership or investment interest in, or
compensation arrangement with, any entity or individual with which
the Organization is negotiating a transaction or arrangement.
Compensation includes direct and indirect remuneration as well as gifts or
favors that are not insubstantial.
A financial interest is not necessarily a conflict of interest. Under Section
3, Paragraph 2, a person who has a financial interest may have a conflict of
interest only if the appropriate governing board or committee decides that a
conflict of interest exists.
Section 3: Procedures:
(a) Duty to Disclose: In connection with any actual or possible conflict
of interest, an interested person must disclose the existence of the financial
interest and be given the opportunity to disclose all material facts to the
Directors and members of committees with governing board delegated
powers considering the proposed transaction or arrangement.
(b) Determining Whether a Conflict of Interest Exists: After disclosure
of the financial interest and all material facts, and after any discussion with
the interested person, he/she shall leave the governing board or committee
meeting while the determination of a conflict of interest is discussed and
voted upon. The remaining board or committee members shall decide if a
conflict of interest exists.
(c) Procedures for Addressing the Conflict of Interest:
(1) An interested person may make a presentation at the governing
board or committee meeting, but after the presentation, he/she shall
leave the meeting during the discussion of, and the vote on, the
transaction or arrangement involving the possible conflict of
interest.
(2) The chairperson of the governing board or committee shall, if
appropriate, appoint a disinterested person or committee to
investigate alternatives to the proposed transaction or arrangement.
(3) After exercising due diligence, the governing board or
committee shall determine whether the Organization can obtain with 
reasonable efforts a more advantageous transaction or arrangement
from a person or entity that would not give rise to a conflict of
interest.
(4) If a more advantageous transaction or arrangement is not
reasonably possible under circumstances not producing a conflict of
interest, the governing board or committee shall determine by a
majority vote of the disinterested Directors whether the transaction
or arrangement is in the Organization’s best interest, for its own
benefit, and whether it is fair and reasonable. In conformity with
the above determination it shall make its decision as to whether to
enter into the transaction or arrangement.
(d) Violations of the Conflicts of Interest Policy:
(1) If the governing board or committee has reasonable cause to
believe a member has failed to disclose actual or possible conflicts
of interest, it shall inform the member of the basis for such belief
and afford the member an opportunity to explain the alleged failure
to disclose.
(2) If, after hearing the member’s response and after making
further investigation as warranted by the circumstances, the
governing board or committee determines the member has failed to
disclose an actual or possible conflict of interest, it shall take
appropriate disciplinary and corrective action.
Section 4: Records of Proceedings: The minutes of the governing board and all
committees with board delegated powers shall contain:
(a) The names of the persons who disclosed or otherwise were found to
have a financial interest in connection with an actual or possible conflict of
interest, the nature of the financial interest, any action taken to determine
whether a conflict of interest was present, and the governing board’s or
committee’s decision as to whether a conflict of interest in fact existed.
(b) The names of the persons who were present for discussions and
votes relating to the transaction or arrangement, the content of the
discussion, including any alternatives to the proposed transaction or
arrangement, and a record of any votes taken in connection with the
proceedings.
Section 5: Compensation:
(a) A voting member of the governing board who receives
compensation, directly or indirectly, from the Organization for services is 
precluded from voting on matters pertaining to that member’s
compensation.
(b) A voting member of any committee whose jurisdiction includes
compensation matters and who receives compensation, directly or
indirectly, from the Organization for services is precluded from voting on
matters pertaining to that member’s compensation.
(c) No voting member of the governing board or any committee whose
jurisdiction includes compensation matters and who receives compensation,
directly or indirectly, from the Organization, either individually or
collectively, is prohibited from providing information to any committee
regarding compensation.
Section 6: Annual Statements: Each Director, principal officer and member of a
committee with governing board delegated powers shall annually sign a
statement which affirms such person:
(a) Has received a copy of the conflicts of interest policy,
(b) Has read and understands the policy,
(c) Has agreed to comply with the policy, and
(d) Understands the Organization is charitable and in order to maintain
its federal tax exemption it must engage primarily in activities which
accomplish one or more of its tax-exempt purposes.
Section 7: Periodic Reviews: To ensure the Organization operates in a manner
consistent with charitable purposes and does not engage in activities that
could jeopardize its tax-exempt status, periodic reviews shall be conducted.
The periodic reviews shall, at a minimum, include the following subjects:
(a) Whether compensation arrangements and benefits are reasonable,
based on competent survey information, and the result of arm’s length
bargaining.
(b) Whether partnerships, joint ventures, and arrangements with
management organizations conform to the Organization’s written policies,
are properly recorded, reflect reasonable investment or payments for goods
and services, further charitable purposes and do not result in inurement,
impermissible private benefit or in an excess benefit transaction.
Section 8: Use of Outside Experts: When conducting the periodic reviews as provided
for in Article VII, the Organization may, but need not, use outside advisors. 
If outside experts are used, their use shall not relieve the governing board
of its responsibility for ensuring periodic reviews are conducted.
ARTICLE FOURTEEN: SEAL
A corporate seal shall not be required. If the Board of Directors elects to provide a seal,
failure to affix such seal to any document shall not affect the validity thereof.
ARTICLE FIFTEEN: AMENDMENT
These Regulations may be altered, amended or repealed, or new Regulations may be
adopted at any annual or special meeting of the members called for that purpose, by the affirmative
vote of the members of the Corporation.
____________________________________
Thomas J. Weidman
____________________________________
Jim LaBarbara
____________________________________
Thomas James
___________________________________
Robert C. Porter, III
___________________________________
Ray Warrick

CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE, TITLE, APPLICABILITY, INTERPRETATION & LEGAL EFFECT
1-1 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES
This Resolution is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Township by Chapter 519 of the Ohio Revised
Code for the following purposes (without indicating order or priority): To promote the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the Township;
(a) To help secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers;
(b) To enable the Township to implement adopted objectives and policies related to land use;
(c) To facilitate implementation of Township land use plans duly adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission;
(d) To facilitate revitalization and redevelopment of blighted areas by zoning for more appropriate uses;
(e) To encourage compatibility between different proposed land uses in the Township and to protect the character
of existing residential, office, commercial and industrial development areas of the Township from the
encroachment of incompatible uses.
(f) To conserve and protect property and property values.
(g) To secure the most appropriate use of land.
(h) To facilitate adequate but economical provision of public improvements.
1-2 TITLE
This resolution shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution,"
"Zoning Resolution" or "Resolution.”
1-3 JURISDICTION
These provisions shall apply to all land areas of Sycamore Township. Those areas are indicated on the Official
Zoning District Map(s) on file with the office of Sycamore Township.
1-4 INTERPRETATION
The provisions of this Resolution shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which they are adopted.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Resolution, these provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare. It is not intended by this Resolution to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants,
building restrictions or other agreements between parties. However, where this Resolution imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premise or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than
are imposed or required by other laws, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants, building
restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this Resolution shall govern. For the purposes of this Resolution, the
following additional rules of interpretation shall apply:
(a) In the event of a conflict between the text of these provisions and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the
text of these provisions shall control.
(b) The words "shall", "must,” and "will", as used in these provisions, are mandatory and indicate an obligation to comply
with the particular provisions to which they apply.
(c) The word "may" as used in these provisions is permissive.
(d) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
(e) Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular unless the
context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
(f) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine.
(g) Headings and captions used throughout this resolution are for convenience and reference only and shall in no way be
held to explain, modify, amplify, or aid in the interpretation or meaning of any provision in this resolution. Statements
of intent or purpose statements used throughout this resolution are for general information only and shall in no way be
held to be requirements or standards.
1-5 SEVERABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township that nothing in this Resolution shall be construed to conflict
with the laws of the State of Ohio or to limit additional requirements, if any, imposed by law. This Resolution and
the various articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases are severable. If any article, section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Resolution shall be declared unconstitutional by the decree of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such constitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this Resolution.
1-6 REPEAL OF PREEXISTING ZONING RESOLUTION AND ESTABLISHMENT
OF ZONING DISTRICTS
(a) The Zoning Resolution previously in effect in Sycamore Township, together with all Zoning District Maps which are a
part of such Resolution, is hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth in this Resolution. However, this
Resolution, including the Zoning District Maps, shall be deemed a continuation of the previous Resolution and not a
new enactment, insofar as the substance of revisions of the previous Resolution are included in this Resolution,
whether in the same or different language. This Resolution shall be so interpreted upon all questions of construction
relating to tenure of officers and boards established by the previous Resolution, to questions of conforming and
nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses, buildings or
structures become conforming or nonconforming.
(b) To the extent that this Resolution reestablishes zoning districts of the same land use category and with the same district
designation and names, these districts and their boundaries as indicated on the Zoning District Maps under the
preexisting Zoning Resolution shall be deemed as continuing until such time as they may be amended pursuant to the
provisions of this Resolution. Zoning districts, which are not reestablished by this Resolution, as indicated on
Table 1-6, are hereby repealed and shall be indicated as repealed on the Zoning District Maps as of the effective date
of this Resolution.
(c) To the extent that this Resolution establishes zoning districts of the same land use category, but different names from
those under the preexisting Resolution, these new district names shall replace the old zoning district names on the
Zoning District Maps in accordance with Table 1-6, but shall retain their existing boundaries.
(d) Zoning districts established by this Resolution in addition to the zoning districts established under the preexisting
Zoning Resolution are indicated in Table 1-6 and shall become effective upon the adoption of such Zoning District
Map amendments by the Board of Township Trustees as are necessary to give effect to the new districts.
(e) The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District as provided for in Chapter 18 is hereby adopted as a zoning
district map amendment to the official zoning map and is applicable to all land within the jurisdiction of these
regulations in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 and Section 3-2.
(f) Any restrictions, covenants, agreements, easements or any other conditions which were placed on any parcels of real
property under the prior Zoning Resolution by any person, board, commission, court or otherwise, prior to the
effective date of this Resolution, whether in the granting of a variance, conditional use permit, or for any other reason,
shall continue in effect and be retained. Adjustments and revisions shall be administered in accordance with
procedures provided for in this Resolution.
TABLE 1-6
DISTRICT EQUIVALENCIES, DELETIONS AND ADDITIONS
ZONING RESOLUTION
DISTRICTS REESTABLISHED AND ESTABLISHED
PREEXISTING ZONING
RESOLUTION DISTRICTS
Residential Districts Residential Districts
AA Residential
A Residential
A-2 Residential
A-35 Residential
B Residential
B-2 Residential
C Residential
D Residential, Multi-Family
"AA" Residential District
"A" Residence District
"A-2" Residence District
“A-35” Residential District
"B" Residence District
"B-2" Residence District
"C" Residence District
"D" Residence District
Commercial Districts Office and Commercial Districts
O Office
E Retail Business
"O" Office District
"E" Retail Business District
Industrial Districts Industrial Districts
F Industrial, Light "F" Light Industrial District
Overlay Districts Overlay Districts
SPI-NR Special Public Interest-Natural Resource
SPI-NQ Special Public Interest-Neighborhood Quality
SPI-SC Special Public Interest-Suburban Center/Corridor
SPI-SV Special Public Interest-Suburban Village
PUD Planned Unit Development
"FPM" Flood Plain Management
District (Repealed)
Special Purpose Districts Special Purpose Districts
Specific Plan Districts Planned Districts
(see Section 3-4)
CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay District
DD Planned Multiple Residence District
OO Planned Office District
EE Planned Business District
FF Planned Light Industrial District
"CUP" Community Unit Plan Overlay
District
"DD" Planned Multiple Residence
District
"OO" Planned Office District
"EE" Planned Business District
"FF" Planned Light Industrial
District
1-8 INITIAL EFFECTIVE DATE
This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after the earliest period allowed by law.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
2-1 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY
For the purposes of this Resolution, certain terms and words are defined and are used in this Resolution in that
defined context. Any words not herein defined shall be construed as defined in the Hamilton County Building Code
and in normal dictionary usage.
2-2 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS
Additional definitions relating to specific portions of this Resolution are found in Chapter 13 (Signs).
2-3 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Resolution, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
A ?
ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by, an alley or
easement.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A single dwelling unit apartment intended for use as a complete independent living
facility that is in the same structure as, under the same ownership as, and subordinate to a residence constructed as a
single-family residence, and with one of the two dwelling units occupied as the principal residence of the owner.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. An accessory structure or use: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal
building or a principal use; (2) is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or principal use
served; (3) contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants, business or industry of the
principal structure or principal use served; and (4) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or principal
use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Resolution. An accessory structure
attached to a principal building and that is located six feet (6) or less, and attached to the existing roofline of the
principle shall be considered part of the principal building.
ADJUSTMENT (OF PLANS). A change in the development plan wherein written conditions or recorded
easements are not modified and the revised (adjusted) plan is in substantial conformity with the intent of the
previously approved plan (PUD’s, S-PUD’s, SPI’s and ZCP’s).
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. Primary responsibility for administering the duties of the Sycamore Township
Zoning Commission as required by this Resolution may be assigned to one or more individuals by the
administrative head of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission . The staff person or persons to whom such
administrative functions are assigned shall be referred to in this resolution as the "Administrative Official.” (See
responsibilities in Section 19-6)
AGGRIEVED PARTY OR PERSON. Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in property on which development
proposed under these regulations has been denied approval, or any person whose legal right has been invaded or
infringed or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected, as distinct from any damages to the rest of the community,
by a government act complained of.
AGRICULTURE, RURAL. (1) Farming, ranching or pasturage; (2) Agriculture, aquaculture and fishing lakes,
horticulture, ornamental horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and wine-making, olericulture, pomiculture;
(3) Production or cultivation of land for mushrooms, timber, nursery stock, sod, tobacco, field crops, and without
limitation, other such agricultural and horticultural commodities; (4) Dairying, and dairy production; (5) Animal or
poultry husbandry, and the production of poultry and poultry products, livestock, equine or forbearing animals, and
wildlife native to this state, including breeding, raising, shearing, grazing or other feeding; (6) Beekeeping and
related apiarian activities and the production of honey, beeswax, honeycomb, and related products; (7) Any
activities listed in (1)-(6) above when carried on by agriculturally oriented groups such as 4-H Clubs, Future
Farmers of America; (8) On-site storing, handling, and processing incidental to the production of the foregoing
agricultural or horticultural products or commodities; (9) Accessory uses and activities directly related to any of the
activities listed in (1)-(8) above including wholesale selling of products, commodities and animals; (10) Farm
markets where fifty per cent or more of the gross market income is derived from produce raised on farm(s) owned
or operated by the market owner, in a normal crop year. The term "rural agriculture" shall not include suburban
agriculture.
AGRICULTURE, SUBURBAN. (1) Farming, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture on lots of one acre
or less in platted subdivisions, or in unplatted subdivisions with 15 or more lots that are contiguous or separated
only by right-of-way, where at least 35% of the lots are developed; or (2) dairying, and animal or poultry husbandry
on lots of five acres or less in any platted subdivision, or in any unplatted subdivision resulting in 15 or more lots,
each smaller than five acres and contiguous or separated only by right-of-way, where at least 35% of the lots are
developed.
AIRPORT. A facility intended and used as the place where one or more fixed-wing or rotary-wing aircraft is
regularly stored, maintained, or repaired while not in flight with an area that the aircraft may use to take off and
land.
ALLEY. A public or private way which is less than thirty (30) feet wide, is dedicated for public use by vehicles and
pedestrians and which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ATHLETIC/PLAY FIELD, PRIVATE. An outdoor athletic field or play field operated by a nonprofit club,
association, or other nonprofit organization.
AUDITORIUM. A room, hall, or building used for public gatherings.
B ?
BAR. A use primarily functioning as an alcoholic beverage consumption establishment or tavern, serving
customers on the premises.
BASEMENT. A story having more than one-half (½) its height above grade. A basement is counted a story for the
purpose of height regulation.
BED AND BREAKFAST. A private owner-occupied residence with one to three guest rooms contained within that
structure and operated so that guests reside at the home for not longer than two continuous weeks. No kitchen
facilities may be provided for use by guests.
BOARD. The Board of Township Trustees of Sycamore Township.
BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where meals only or lodging and meals are provided for
compensation for three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA). The Sycamore Township Board of Zoning Appeals as established by this
Resolution. The Board of Zoning Appeals is a commission of five Township residents appointed by the
Trustees. This board acts autonomously on proposed variances and appeals. Because no zoning code can
encompass all possibilities, the board makes decisions on specific regulations to allow a deviation from the exact
"letter of the law."
BUFFER OR BUFFER YARD. An area of healthy and viable vegetation, natural or planted, adjoining or
surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building structure, paving or portion of such land use,
for the purposes of separating, screening and softening the effects of the land use. No part of this buffer is to be
used for active recreation, parking, or interior access drives. A buffer may include a wall, fence or berm,
connecting driveways, underground utilities and permitted signage as provided in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 14 or any other related chapter.
BUFFER, BOUNDARY. A linear area adjacent to the side and/or rear property line that is set aside to separate,
screen, and soften the detrimental impacts of different uses or intensities upon one another and upon the
surrounding neighborhood.
BUFFER, STREETSCAPE. A linear area adjacent to the front property line extending from side lot-line to side lotline
that is set aside to shield or enhance views into the parking lot, establish coordination among diverse buildings,
setbacks and uses, to define the street and access points, to retain the quality of the environment by providing
appropriate vertical mass in keeping with dimensions of horizontal voids, and to diminish the presence of
wires/poles, lights and other clutter along the public right-of-way.
BUILDABLE AREA. Space remaining on a lot after the minimum zoning requirements for yards, setbacks,
coverage and allowances for panhandles, easements and restrictions have been met.
BUILDING. A temporary or permanent structure having a roof supported by walls and which can be used for the
shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, motor vehicles, boats and other goods.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs excluding elevator shafts, chimneys and other structures.
BUILDING LINE. The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance required between the street right-of-way
line and the building or any projection thereof other than a step or uncovered porch.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building containing the principal use of the lot.
BULK. The three dimensional space occupied by a structure or building, defined by its height, width, and depth.
C ?
CALIPER. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured four (4) inches above
natural grade for trees having calipers less than or equal to six (6) inches diameter; and measured as the diameter at
breast height (DBH of 4 ½ feet above grade) for tree calipers greater than six (6) inches diameter.
CAMPGROUND. Any land or open-air location where one or more persons erect or occupy a temporary shelter,
such as a tent or recreational vehicle, providing outdoor recreational facilities, for a temporary period of time;
includes camps and summer camps.
CANDLEPOWER. The total luminous intensity of a light source expressed in foot-candles measured at ground
level. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of foot-candles emitted by any lamp, light source, or
luminaries.
CELLAR. A story having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade. A cellar is counted as a story for the
purpose of height regulation only if used for purposes other than storage, utilities or the quarters of a janitor or
watchman employed on the premises.
CEMETERY. An area of land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals, and
for the erection of customary markers, monuments, and mausoleums.
CHURCH / PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building used principally for religious worship.
CLINIC, MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR OPTICAL. A use or structure intended or used primarily for the testing and
treatment of human medical, dental, or optical disorders, but not including overnight boarding of patients.
CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of
persons for a social, educational, recreational, charitable, political, patriotic or athletic purpose, but not primarily for
profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
CLUB, PRIVATE. Lands and facilities operated by or for a group or association of persons, and their guests, which
are not available for unrestricted public access or use.
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY. An institution of higher education authorized by the State to offer baccalaureate or
graduate degrees.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. An occupation, employment or enterprise which is carried on for profit by the owner,
lessee or licensee, except for activities carried on by a not-for-profit organization which utilizes the proceeds of
such activities solely for the purposes for which it is organized.
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE. A use or structure where business or professional services are made available to the
public, including but not limited to financial institutions, tax preparation, accounting, architectural, legal services,
medical laboratories, optical laboratories, dental laboratories, psychological counseling, real estate and securities
brokering, professional consulting services, and hotels and motels, but not including the cutting or styling of hair, or
recreational facilities or amusements.
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL BUSINESS (SALES AND SERVICES). A building, property, or activity, the principal
use or purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, or merchandise directly to the consumer. In addition, it shall
include the provision of personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty parlors, laundry and dry
cleaning establishments, tailoring shops, shoe repair shops and the like.
COMPOST BIN. A fixed or moveable structure made up of fencing or other material for the purpose of containing
and cultivating compost.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use permissible within a district other than a principally permitted use, requiring
application for a Conditional Use Certificate and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as stated in Chapter 17.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Those materials resulting from the alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation,
or repair of any manmade physical structure, including but not limited to houses, buildings, industrial or commercial
facilities, or roadways and as regulated in the Ohio Revised Code.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY. A housing development that is planned, designed, and
operated to provide a full range of accommodations and services for older adults, including independent living,
congregate housing (self-contained apartments), and medical care.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A facility for the confinement of persons held in lawful custody.
CULTURAL FACILITY. Establishments providing cultural, historic, or educational services to the public and
which are not operated for profit. Typical uses include museums, outdoor drama theaters (not drive-ins), botanical
gardens, and zoos.
D ?
DAY CARE, ADULT. A place that provides community based programs designed to meet the health, social and
related needs of functionally impaired adults during daytime hours.
DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD. Any place in which child day care is provided, with or without compensation, for
thirteen (13) or more children at one time or any place that is not the permanent residence of the licensee or
administrator in which child day care is provided, with or without compensation, for seven (7) or more children at
one time or four (4) or more children under two years of age at one time. For the purposes of this definition, any
children under six years of age who are related to the provider of child day care and who are on the premises shall
be counted.
DAY CARE, CHILD TYPE A. A permanent residence of the administrator in which child day-care is provided for
seven (7) to twelve (12) children at one time or for four (4) to twelve (12) children at one time if for the latter four
(4) or more children are under two years of age. Any children under six years of age who are related to a licensee,
administrator, or employee and who are on the premises shall be counted.
DAY CARE, CHILD TYPE B. A permanent residence of the provider in which child day-care is provided for one
(1) to six (6) children at one time and in which no more than three (3) children may be under two years of age at one
time. Any children under six years of age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises shall be
counted.
DENSITY, GROSS. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the gross area of a site
(including public rights-of-way), expressed in gross dwelling units per acre.
(total number of dwelling units ?total gross acreage = gross density)
DENSITY, NET. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the area of the site consisting of the
gross area minus the area for rights-of-way and easements for public streets expressed in net dwelling units per acre.
For calculation of preliminary or conceptual plans where actual location and area of right-of-way is not yet
determined, the net density shall be based on 82% of the gross area.
(total number of dwelling units ? total gross acreage less R.O.W. and easements for public streets = net density)
DEVELOPER. Any person seeking approval under these provisions for any form of development.
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate that requires a Zoning Certificate
or other approval under this Resolution. For the purposes this Resolution, the following activities or uses shall be
considered “development”:
(a) The reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land or water.
(b) A change in the intensity of use of land such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or
a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure
or on land.
(c) Commencement of drilling (except to obtain soil samples), mining, or excavation on a parcel of land.
(d) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land.
(e) Subdivision of land.
"Development" includes all other activity customarily associated with it. When appropriate to the context,
"development" refers to the act of developing or to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is
not intended to mean that the operation or activity, is not development. Reference to particular types of operations
is not intended to limit the scope of this definition.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY. A plan for the specific development and specific use of a parcel as a
planned unit development pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18, submitted prior to the submission of a final
development plan and indicating such items and features as are required pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk
measured four and one-half (4½) feet above natural grade.
DISTRICT, ZONING. Those portions of Sycamore Township established pursuant to Chapter 3 within which
certain regulations and requirements apply pursuant to the provisions of this Resolution. The administrative
approval of planned unit developments (PUD-1 or PUD-2) within the Planned Unit Development Overlay District
shall neither create a new district under the provisions of this Resolution nor be deemed an amendment to this
Resolution for the purpose of Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
DORMITORY. A building used as a group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use
for a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use.
DRAINAGE WAY. A minor watercourse identified by the presence of an intermittent or perennial waterway or by
the presence of the following seasonally saturated soil types as identified by a soil survey prepared by the U.S.
Department of Agricultural, Soil Conservation Service: Ave Silt Loam; Avonburo Silt Loam, Dana Silt Loam;
Fincastle Silt Loam; Henshaw Silt Loam; Markland Silt Clay Loam; Patton Silt Clay Loam; Raub Silt Loam;
Rossmore Silt Loam; Wakeland Loam; Xenia Silt Loam, and also including any area of less than one-quarter acre
which meets the definition of a wetland as defined herein, except for size.
DRIP LINE. The perimeter of the circular area surrounding the trunk of a tree measured as one (1) foot of radius
from the centerline of the trunk for each one (1) inch caliper or a vertical line extending from the outermost
branches of a tree to the ground.
DRIVE, ACCESS. The connecting access linkage between any roadway and off-street parking area having no
parking along the drive.
DRIVE, ENTRY. That part of an access drive leading to a vehicular use area that encompasses the first thirty feet
from the right-of-way or easement of the street and a parking setback of eight feet from the curb or pavement of the
drive.
DRIVE, PRIVATE. A shared means of vehicular ingress and egress located within an easement of access serving
two (2) to six (6) lots, not dedicated to the Township by recorded instrument, that is maintained by the party or
parties using such private drive for private access.
DRIVEWAY. A private way, other than a street or alley, to one lot of record for the use of vehicles and
pedestrians.
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. An establishment or facility that by design of physical facilities or
by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product or to be
entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle on the premises.
DWELLING. Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential purposes
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit of one or more rooms providing complete, independent living facilities for one
or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, but not
including a tent, cabin, recreational vehicle or other temporary or transient structure or facility. A Dwelling unit
shall include a Modular Industrialized Unit but shall not include a Manufactured HUD Unit, a Mobile home or
recreational vehicle and camping equipment.
E ?
EASEMENT. A recorded right or privilege of a person, other than the owner or tenant, to use land for a specific
purpose.
EASEMENT OF ACCESS. An easement for immediate or future use, to provide vehicular access and
accommodation for utilities, from a street to a lot, a principal building or an accessory building.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE). Any building used for education or instruction on an
elementary or secondary level, approved under the regulations of the State
EQUINE. A horse, pony, mule or ass.
EFFECTIVE DATE. The date that amendments to this zoning resolution were effective.
EFFECTIVE DATE, INITIAL. The date that this zoning resolution was first established and in effect as specified
in Section 1- 8 of this resolution.
F ?
FAMILY. A person or group of persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, including a
“family home” as herein defined, but as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, fraternity/sorority
house, hotel or other type of contractual living quarters.
FAMILY HOME. A residential facility shared by at least six (6) but not more than eight (8) mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled individuals plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either
living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or present on shifts, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a
long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community
activities for the residents in order to enable them to live as independently as possible in a residential environment.
This definition shall not include an alcoholism or drug treatment center, a work release facility for convicts or exconvicts,
or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration.
FARM MARKET. The use of any land for a roadside produce stand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross
income received from the market is derived from produce raised on farms owned or operated by the market operator
in a normal crop year and provided that the structure shall not exceed 800 square feet and such structure and parking
areas shall be at least sixty (60) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence districts; and that a
sign advertising such products shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
FESTIVAL, TEMPORARY. A time of celebration, characterized by a program of cultural events or entertainment,
which takes place for a specified, temporary duration.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A building, property or activity, the principal use or purpose of which is the
provision of financial services, including but not limited to banks, facilities for automated teller machines
("ATMs"), credit unions, savings and loan institutions and mortgage companies. "Financial Institution" shall not
include any use or other type of institution which is otherwise listed in the Table of Permissible Uses for each
category of zoning district or districts under this Resolution.
FLOODPLAIN. A floodplain is an area contiguous to a lake, pond, or streambed whose elevation is greater than
the normal waterpool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation. An inland
depressional floodplain is a floodplain not associated with a stream system to which surrounding lands drain
causing periodic inundation by storm waters. See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FLOOD FRINGE. The area of the base floodplain outside the floodway.
Figure: FLOODWAY, FLOOD FRINGE, & FLOODPLAIN
FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), such as the top of the slab in
concrete slab construction or the top of the wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the building, measured from the exterior
walls or from the centerline of party walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures.
FLOOR AREA, NET. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the building, measured from the exterior
walls or from the centerline of party walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures. The term
does not include any area used exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles or for building or equipment access,
such as stairs, elevator shafts, and maintenance crawl space or areas occupied by mechanical equipment, toilet or
rest rooms.
FOOT-CANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform
point source of one (1) standard candle.
FOREST. An area with a minimum of 5 acres of continuous woods having a minimum 120 feet width, with at least
7% of the land area containing trees with a diameter breast height of four inches or more. (Source: Forest Tax Law
of Ohio)
FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The length of an enclosed building facing a public or private street.
FRONTAGE, STREET OR LOT. The portion of a lot along the right-of-way line of any adjoining
improved, unlimited access public thoroughfare.
G ?
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building, including a carport,
which is intended for and used for storing the privately owned motor vehicles, boats and trailers of the family or
families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly
with motor vehicles, boats and trailers is carried on.
GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building or premises used for storage of motor-driven vehicles pursuant to previous
arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold, and motor-driven vehicles
are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY. Any building or structure used by government for administrative or service
purposes, but not including buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
Includes but not limited to police and fire stations, government buildings, and similar uses and facilities.
GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior
walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established
by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six (6)
feet (1829 mm) from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet (1829 mm) from the building.
GRANNY COTTAGE. Temporary detached living quarters on a single-family lot subordinate in size, location, and
appearance to the primary residence and providing complete housekeeping facilities for the exclusive use of the
occupants. The owner of the principal residence and lot must live in one of the dwelling units on the lot and at least
one occupant of the principal residence and one of the unit must be related by blood, marriage, adoption or other
legal relationship.
GREENHOUSE. A glassed or translucent enclosure used for the cultivation or protection of plants.
GROUP HOME. A residential facility shared by nine (9) to sixteen (16) handicapped individuals plus paid
professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or
present on shifts, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long-term, family-like environment in which
staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents in order to enable
them to live as independently as possible in a residential environment. The definition shall not include an
alcoholism or drug treatment center, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilities
serving as an alternative to incarceration.
H ?
HALFWAY HOUSE. An establishment whose primary purpose is the rehabilitation of persons. Such services
include drug and alcohol rehabilitation, assistance to emotionally and mentally disturbed persons, and rehabilitation
for prison parolees and juveniles.
HANDICAP. With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
major life activities, a record of such an impairment, or being regarding as having such an impairment. This
definition does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance. As used in this definition,
the following terms and phrases have the following meanings:
(a) "physical or mental impairment". Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss
affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory,
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic; skin; and
endocrine; or
Any mental or psychological disorder such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness,
and specific disabilities. The term "physical or mental impairment" includes but is not limited to such diseases and
conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular
dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus infection, mental
retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current illegal use of a controlled
substance) and alcoholism.
(b) "major life activities". Functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning and working.
(c) "has a record of such an impairment". A history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
(d) "is regarded as having an impairment".
1. A physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that
is treated by another person as constituting such a limitation;
2. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities only as a result
of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
3. Having none of the impairments defined in Paragraph (a) of this definition but is treated by another person
as having such an impairment.
HELIPORT. A facility or structure that is intended or used for the landing and take-off of rotary-wing aircraft, but
not including the regular repair or maintenance of such aircraft or the sale of goods or materials to users of such
aircraft.
HOBBY BREEDER. One who breeds occasional litters of dogs, cats, or other household pets for recreation and the
primary purpose of, but not limited to, improving the physical and mental soundness of the breed and who may
prove their breeding program by exhibiting in conformation, hunting, performance, or other tests.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof, and which is an accessory use clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for
dwelling purposes in connection with which there is no product display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. Home occupations shall not include any
retail or wholesale business of any kind or any similar intensity of activities regardless of remuneration involving
in-person transactions on the premises.
HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily temporary
in-patients, with illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other physical or mental condition, and including as an
integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities or training facilities.
"Hospital" does not include institutions for the permanent care of, or occupation by, the poor, infirm, incurable or
insane.
HOTEL OR MOTEL. A building containing more than four individual rooms for the purpose of providing, for
periods not exceeding thirty days, overnight lodging facilities to the general public for compensation with or
without meals, and which has common facilities for reservations and cleaning services, combined utilities, and onsite
management and reception.
I ?
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water,
including but not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks and paved recreational facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR). The total area of impervious surfaces divided by the net area (excluding
right-of-way) of the lot.
INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT (MODULAR). A modular structure which complies with the standards and
specifications for Industrial Units of Closed Construction, as provided for by the Ohio Basic Building Code as
amended and as authorized by the Board of Building Standards pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Section 3781.01 et
seq. as amended and to which is affixed a permit, sticker, plate or other recognized, official identification indicating
such compliance. The structure is composed of components substantially assembled in an off-site manufacturing
plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
INDUSTRIAL USE. The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials; or any operation or facility
including buildings, equipment structures, or stationary items used for industrial purposes.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using processes that
ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot
which such assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a
building, or where the area occupied by outdoor storage of goods and materials used in such processes does not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of all buildings on the property. "Light industrial" shall not
include hazardous materials treatment and storage facilities, agricultural industries, plating or enameling, pilot
plants, prototype production plants, abattoirs, tanning and fur finishing, or petroleum and gas refining, or any use
which is otherwise listed specifically in the Table of Permissible Uses for each category of zoning district or
districts under this Resolution.
INSTITUTIONAL USE. A building, structure or land used for educational, religious, human care or similar types
of public or quasi-public purposes. This category shall include but not be limited to schools, universities, churches
and other places of worship, cemeteries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, nursing and convalescent homes,
day care centers, continuous care retirement facility and hospitals.
INTERIOR PARKING-LOT LANDSCAPING. An area set aside. Usually as an island in a parking lot, to provide
environmental relief. The interior buffer will help to define spaces and indicate directions for pedestrian and
vehicular circulation.
J ?
JUNK VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED
K ?
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. A structure or premises used for the housing, grooming, breeding, boarding, training,
selling or other animal husbandry activities for dogs, cats or other animals for financial or other compensation.
KENNEL, PRIVATE. The home and premises of a hobby breeder.
L ?
LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two (2) or more acres, which retains water
year round.
LAKE, COMMERCIAL FISHING/PAY LAKE. A private or publicly owned lake or pond, where a fee is charged
in exchange for the permission to fish.
LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs, and trees. Landscaping may
include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and other similar natural and
artificial objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
LIGHT, CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to ensure that no light is directly emitted above a
horizontal line parallel to the ground.
LIGHT, NON-CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to allow light to be directly emitted above a
horizontal line parallel to the ground, as illustrated in Section 12-7.
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR. Any source that is installed or mounted outside of an enclosed building, but not
including street lights installed or maintained along public streets by a government agency or public utility.
LIVESTOCK. Hoofed mammals, including but not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, bison, llamas, and
other species typically raised for food, fiber or draft. Also includes domestic fowl and game birds.
LOT. A parcel of land resulting from the subdivision of a larger parcel of land and occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal use or structure, together with any accessory structures or uses and such access ways,
parking area, yards, and open spaces required under the provisions of this Resolution.
LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within the lot lines of the lot. No public right-of-way or access
easement for a public street or handle of a panhandle lot shall be included in the calculation of the lot area, nor shall
the public right-of-way cross the lot area.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more public or private streets at their intersection or upon two parts
of the same street, and in either case forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A
corner lot abutting public streets, or abutting private streets that provide existing or potential vehicular access to
driveways for more than six (6) lots, must have two required front yards.
LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DEVELOPED. A lot with at least one building, structure, or improvement that is subject to real property
taxation or that is subject to the tax on manufactured homes under Section 4503.06 of the Revised Code.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot with opposite ends abutting on public or private streets.
LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, PANHANDLE. A lot also known as a “rear lot” or a “flag lot” which utilizes a narrow strip of land or stem,
not a building site, to provide access to, or legal frontage on, a public street, or a private street. The panhandle of
such lot is not considered a building site, nor is the area of such included in calculating the lot area.
LOT, REVERSE. A lot intended to have its rear yard abutting any road frontage.
LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line(s) generally opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot
or lots shall be called an interior side lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map or metes and bounds description of which has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was of record
on or prior to adoption of zoning. For the purpose of these regulations, any improvement plan of a subdivision
which has been approved by official action of the Zoning Commission of Sycamore Township shall have the same
status as if the subdivision plan was officially recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton County.
LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the right-of-way, or access easement.
LUMINARIES. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and
decorative parts.
M ?
MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built dwelling, other than an industrialized unit (modular home), that is
manufactured or constructed in an off-site manufacturing facility, transportable in one or more sections, which in
the traveling mode is at least eight (8) body feet in width and at least forty (40) body feet in length, or, when erected
on site is at least 320 square feet, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the standards
established by the Federal Manufacturing Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.
Section 5401 et seq., and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
MARINA. A boat basin and recreational facility, located on waterfront property, providing moorings for boats, and
one or more of the following facilities; boat launching ramps, boat livery, boat sales, maintenance shops, marine
supply store, and fuel dock.
MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains
equal or varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of
residential or commercial customer's goods or wares. Such facilities do not include sales, service, nor storage of
hazardous materials.
MOBILE HOME. A transportable factory-built dwelling, other than a manufactured home or a modular home,
which will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected to utilities, whether resting
on wheels, jacks, blocks, or other foundation and used or so construed as to permit its being used as conveyance
upon the public streets and highways. Most significantly the term mobile home designates those units not in
compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et.
seq.)
MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land for the parking of Mobile Homes and/or Manufactured HUD Units which
complies with the rules of the Ohio Department of Health, Public Health Council for Manufactured Home Parks, as
adopted pursuant to Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code, and such other requirements as are imposed by the
Hamilton County Health Department.
MODIFICATION (OF STANDARDS). A change in a specification or requirement where strict adherence to a
written regulation due to unusual site conditions serves no meaningful purpose or makes it physically impossible to
achieve compliance.
MODULAR HOME. See Industrialized Unit.
N ?
NATURAL RESOURCES. All natural areas of lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains, drainage ways, forests, and
steep slopes as defined in this Chapter or in Chapter 14.
NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE. Any structure lawfully existing on the initial effective date of this Resolution,
or any amendment thereto which is in noncompliance with the standards and regulations of this Resolution or any
amendment thereto.
NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure on the initial effective
date of this Resolution or any amendment thereto which is not permitted as-of-right and not permissible as a
Conditional Use or as a Planned Unit Development under this Resolution or any amendment thereto in the District
in which it is situated.
NURSERY. A place where the primary activity is the growing of plants, trees and shrubs for sale.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A home, institution, building or residence, public or private, whether
operated for profit or not, presently licensed pursuant to the Ohio Statutes, which provides maintenance, personal
care or nursing to ill, physically infirm, convalescing, or aged persons who are not related by blood or marriage to
the operator. The definition of nursing or convalescent home does not include hospitals, clinics or similar
institutions which are devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
O ?
OPEN SPACE. Land used for recreation, resource protection, hillside, floodway, lake, pond, amenity and/or
buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot constituting neither the minimum lot area of said lot nor any part of an
existing or future road or right-of-way be counted as constituting open space.
OWNER. Any full owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety with legal or equitable title to the whole or to part of a structure or land.
P ?
PARCEL. Any quantity of land and water capable of being described with such specificity that its location and
boundaries may be established as distinct from other parcels which is designated by its owner or developer as land
to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or developed as a unit.
PARK. Any land owned by the public and open for use by the general public for active or passive recreational
purposes or as a refuge for wildlife.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY. Parking lot provided to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass transit
or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting.
PARKING LOT. An area of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces for five or more vehicles.
PARKING SPACE. A paved area either within a structure or in the open, including stacking spaces, exclusive of
driveways, access drives and aisle, permanently reserved for the parking of a motor vehicle and connected to a street
or alley by a surfaced driveway of adequate width to permit easy movement of the vehicle to and from such space.
PATIO AREA. A roofless inner space or space adjoining a residence which is used for dining or recreation.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association,
two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity.
PET, HOUSEHOLD. Domesticated animals that share the same domicile or premises with humans; are dependent
upon humans for food, water and shelter; and are kept as companions, including but not limited to dogs, cats, caged
birds of a variety of species, rodents, rabbits, and nonpoisonous reptiles and amphibians, that are not included in the
definitions of livestock and exotic wildlife.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A type of development that enables residential, commercial,
industrial or any other uses to be developed alone or in combination under one unified plan of development under
more flexible standards pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18 or Section 7-7 of this
Resolution. (See PUD-1 and PUD-2 for explanation of alternative processes for administrative approval.)
POND. A natural or artificial body of water of less than two (2) acres which retains water year round.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS. A moving and storage service whereby the company delivers and leaves
a storage container on-site for the customer to pack. The storage container is then left on-site or picked up and
moved to a separate company warehouse or the customer’s destination for unpacking and subsequent removal.
PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is proposed to serve.
PROJECT AREA. Any area of land, regardless of the number of individual parcels or zone districts contained or
proposed therein on which development is proposed under these regulations.
PUBLIC SERVICE. A building, structure, or place used by or for the general populous, owned or operated by a
government organization. This category shall include but not be limited to police and fire stations, government
buildings and storage yards, government facilities such as libraries, as well as park and rides, and other similar uses
and facilities.
PUD. (See Planned Unit Development)
PUD-1. Planned unit development whose net density or intensity requires Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
approval. (See “Planned Unit Development”)
PUD-2. Planned unit development whose net density or intensity requires both Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission and Township Trustee approval. (See “Planned Unit Development”)
PUD PLAN (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN). A plan for the use and development of the tract
showing the areas within which buildings, parking areas, and buffering are to be located accompanied by a detailed
description on the plat identifying the permissible range or limits of size, height, type, and other pertinent details for
buildings, structures, signage, lighting, pedestrian ways, vehicular access, circulation patterns, parking areas,
landscaping and buffering, impervious surface ratio, density, yards and other information with regard to the lot and
neighboring lots as may be necessary for the enforcement of this Resolution and any other requirements as
identified on the application form or forms provided by the Administrative Official. All dimensions shown on these
plats relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey.
PUD Plans are required in the following two types of Planned Unit Developments:
(a) a plan which is submitted to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission within the established PUD Overlay
District for administrative approval (PUD-1) or recommendation to the Board of Township Trustees for
legislative approval (PUD-2). (Note: The legislative approval creates an alternative set of overlay regulations,
available at the election of the property owner, for a specific development plan but does not preclude the
development of the property for other uses permitted in an underlying non-PUD district.)
(b) a plan submitted to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission as a part of the zone amendment process for
administrative approval of a Specific Plan District (SPUD). (Note: The administrative approval requires
compliance with a PUD Plan and conditions of approval by the Board of Township Trustees and precludes the
development of the property for any use that does not comply with the approved PUD Plan. The rezoning can
be initiated only by the property owner.)
R ?
RECREATION CENTER, INTERNAL. Buildings or facilities owned or operated as a non-profit enterprise by a
condominium, homeowners, or property owners association with the intent that their usage be only by residents of
the development.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. A public or private indoor or outdoor recreation facility operated as a
commercial activity, including but not limited to batting cages, bowling alleys, dragstrips, raceways, golf driving
ranges, gun-firing ranges, mechanical rides, miniature golf courses, racquet clubs, arenas, amphitheaters, stadiums,
health and fitness facilities, and swimming pools.
RECREATION, COMMUNITY FACILITY, PRIVATE. A building or facility operated by a private or non-profit
group for a social or recreational purpose, but not as a commercial activity. Includes but is not limited to country
clubs, athletic fields, golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, and YMCAs.
RECREATION, COMMUNITY FACILITY, PUBLIC. A building or facility operated by a governmental agency
for a social or recreational purpose, but not as a commercial activity. Includes but is not limited to athletic fields,
golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, parks, playgrounds, wildlife reservations, forests, senior centers, and recreation
centers.
RECREATION, CULTURAL, and ENTERTAINMENT. A public or private facility, of a non-commercial nature,
designed and equipped to be used for sport, leisure, cultural, or entertainment activities including internal recreation
centers, private and public community recreation facilities, and cultural facilities, but excluding commercial
recreation facilities.
RECREATION, VEHICLE. Any boat, trailer, ATV, mobile home, camper, jet ski, go cart or other use used for the
purpose of traveling and recreational activities.
RECYCLING FACILITY. An operation or material recovery facility which processes, treats, converts, and stores
materials which have been discarded.
RECYCLING DROP-OFF FACILITY. Site for collection in containers and transfer of waste materials (may be
household hazardous waste) for recycling.
RESEARCH LABORATORY. A place equipped for experimentation, testing and analysis, and observation and
study for scientific research.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A home or facility in which a person with a mental illness, mental retardation or
developmental disability resides, except a home subject to Chapter 3721 of the Ohio Revised Code or the home of a
relative or legal guardian in which a person with a mental illness, mental retardation or developmental disability
resides.
RESIDENTIAL USE. A home, abode, dwelling unit or place, where a family or individual(s) live; where such a
place has areas for living and eating within the structure. This category includes but is not limited to single-family
detached units, single-family detached units in PUD’s (clustered, patio-dwelling, and zero lot-line), multi-family
units, and manufactured or mobile homes as well as uses such as bed & breakfast facilities, granny cottages, group
homes, and day care /Type A.
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY. Two or more attached dwelling units sharing one or more common walls
between any two units and/or stacked one above another. This category shall include but not be limited to twofamily,
three-family, apartments, townhouses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and boarding houses.
RESIDENTIAL, PATIO. A single-family detached or semi-detached unit, enclosed by a solid wall located at the
lot line. The wall may be broken only by a driveway or a pedestrian access, in order to create a private yard
between the dwelling and the wall. All such walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTERED. A building intended or used primarily for residential purposes
to be occupied by one family, and located in a grouping of structures that are arranged closer to one another than
District setback requirements would normally allow to provide open space, and/or conservation of natural features
and which are built as part of a Planned Unit Development at a net density permitted in the underlying zone
districts.
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one
family as that term is defined in this Chapter and surrounded by open space or yards and which has no roof, wall or
floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL, TWO-FAMILY. A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL, THREE-FAMILY. A building consisting of three (3) dwelling units whether one above the other
or side by side share a common entrance or entrance way, or have separate entrances or entrance ways, in a single
building occupying one (1) lot.
RESIDENTIAL, TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any
other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.
RESIDENTIAL, ZERO LOT-LINE. A building or portion thereof designed for residential purposes. The dwelling
unit is a single-family detached unit that is placed against one of the side lot lines to allow more open and yard
space.
RESTAURANT. An establishment where prepared and ready-to-consume food is available to the general public
for consumption on or off the premises.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.). A strip of land dedicated by recorded instrument occupied or intended to be occupied
by a public street or railroad and within which may be located electric transmission lines, gas pipe lines, water
mains, sanitary sewers or storm sewers.
S ?
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is
meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, and satellite
microwave antennas.
SCHOOL. A privately-owned or publicly-owned pre-school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school,
high school, or vocational or professional school, with no rooms regularly used for housekeeping or sleeping rooms.
SCREEN. A method of reducing the impacts of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more
harmonious elements which is 100 % opaque.
SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission.
SHOOTING GALLERY. An enclosed structure in which weapons are fired at a target which is set up at a distance.
SHOPPING CENTER. A group of two or more retail establishments and/or restaurants, planned and developed
with a unified design of buildings with off-street parking, landscaped areas, and service areas and pedestrian malls
or plazas provided on the property as part of the unified design.
SHRUB. A plant that at the time of planting, is at least eighteen inches (18”) tall above the highest root, or of a size
requiring a two (2) gallon pot.
SHRUBS, HEDGE. Plants that at maturity will range in height from 7 feet to 15 feet and are spaced from 3 to 6
feet on center depending upon the variety.
SHRUBS, BLOOMING. Plants that flower or undergo change in leaf color. They range in height from 2 to 14
feet.
SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and visible from the
exterior of the building or structure, that is used to advertise, identify display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors illumination or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem
of any nation, organization of nations, state or city, or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations; or city, or any
fraternal, religious or civic organizations; works of art which in no way identify a product or business logo. See
related sign definitions that are listed alphabetically in Chapter 13.
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING UNITS: Detached, individual dwelling units, which accommodate one group of
persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage; or up to five unrelated individuals living as one housekeeping unit.
SITE AREA, GROSS. The computed area contained within the lot lines which includes rights-of-way , either as an
easement or dedicated.
SITE AREA, NET. The computed area contained within the lot lines, less any land within rights-of-way and
easements for public streets.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. All that area within Zones A1-A30 and the unnumbered A Zones on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map for Unincorporated Hamilton County, Ohio, and all that area within the unincorporated
territory of Hamilton County, Ohio, designed as being within the flood plain of various streams in Appendix A of
the Storm Drainage and Open Space Master Plan for Hamilton County, Ohio.
STABLE. A structure and/or land use in or on which equines are bred, boarded trained, or kept for sale or hire.
STADIUM. A structure or facility designed, intended, or used primarily for athletic or entertainment events and
containing seating for spectators of those events, but not including a raceway or dragstrip.
STEEP SLOPES. Land area where the inclination of the land's surface from the horizontal is twenty percent (20%)
or greater.
STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar as defined herein, included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not
more than three (3) feet above the top level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use.
STREAM. A shallow watercourse that flows year round generally less than 40 feet wide.
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL. A street which serves the major activity centers, high traffic volume corridors, and
the longer trip desires. With major arterials, service to the adjacent land is subordinate to the provision of travel
service.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which provides both land access and traffic circulation within residential,
commercial, and industrial areas. It differs from an arterial in that collector streets may penetrate these areas and
arterials usually do not. Collector streets distribute traffic from arterial streets and channel traffic from local streets.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL. Public streets having the primary purpose of collecting traffic from intersecting
local streets and distributing this volume to the nearest arterial. A secondary purpose is to carry moderate volumes
of through traffic. Access to abutting land uses is a secondary function which, with proper land planning, may be
limited so long as the abutting land use is not materially and adversely affected by such limitation.
STREET, LOCAL. Streets having the primary purpose of providing access to individual properties that abut them.
Local streets serve residential, commercial, and industrial land uses providing links for short-distance trips and
access to the collector and arterial system on a local level. Frontage roads may also be considered local streets.
STREET, PRIVATE. A shared means of vehicular ingress and egress located within an easement of access serving
more than six (6) lots, not dedicated to the Township by recorded instrument, that is maintained by the party or
parties using such private street for private access. Private streets are permitted within a 30 foot easement and must
be constructed to County Engineer standards, except for width.
STREET, PUBLIC. A publicly dedicated or owned right-of-way constructed to County Engineer standards
intended or used, for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and, except where limited or controlled access, affording
the principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any increase in the area of cubical contents of the building.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to
something having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
advertising signs, billboards, area improved for parking, backstops for tennis courts and pergolas.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A structure containing the principal use of the lot.
SUMMER CAMP. A publicly or privately owned facility providing outdoor recreational activities and shelter for
one or a group of persons, usually children, for a temporary period of time.
T ?
TEMPORARY USE. A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue
such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
building or structure.
TERMINAL, TRUCK. A structure or land primarily used for the temporary storage of goods awaiting transfer or
wholesale distribution by means of motor carrier transportation.
THEATER, MOVIE AND DRAMA, INDOOR. A building in which movies are screened before a live audience,
or in which dramatic performances are carried out.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN. An officially adopted plan by the Board of Township Trustees and Regional Planning
Commission which provides guidance in the development of future transportation networks capable of safely
accommodating traffic volumes generated by growth and development.
TRAILER, UTILITY. Any towed vehicle constructed, re-constructed or added to by means of accessories in such
a manner as will permit the storage or conveyance of machinery, tools or equipment, including those vehicles that
are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole purpose of transporting goods or farm animals.
TRAILER, RV. Any towed or self-propelled vehicle constructed, re-constructed or added to by means of
accessories in such a manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for temporary human habitation for
travel, recreation, vacation or other primarily transient purposes, as opposed to a mobile home as defined in this
Chapter; or office use, including those vehicles that are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole purpose of
transportation.
TRAILER, LIVESTOCK. Any towed vehicles that are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole purpose of
transporting goods or farm animals.
TRANSFER STATION. A combination of structures, machinery or devices at a place or facility that receives solid
waste taken from municipal and private collection vehicles and places the waste in other transportation units for
movement to another solid waste management facility.
TREES, CANOPY. A deciduous tree which at maturity will shed its leaves annually, and provide shade. (see
Section 15-3)
TREES, EVERGREEN. A coniferous tree with needles or a broadleaf tree which retains its leaves throughout the
year. (see Section 15-3)
TREE, UNDERSTORY. A lower growing tree which screens, flowers, defines space and provides seasonal
interest. (see Section 15-3).
U ?
USE. The purpose of activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED. Any use which is identified in Section 3-2 and with a “P” in Tables 4-5, 5-4, 6-4 and 7-5.
USE, PERMISSIBLE. Any use which is identified in Section 3-2 and with a “PUD-1”, “PUD-2” or “C” in Tables
4-5, 5-4, 6-4 and 7-5 or with a “S-PUD” in Table 7-8.
V ?
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. A vehicle which displays any commercial activity and which use is primarily for
commercial purposes.
VEHICLE, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED. Any transportation vehicle, stored outdoors, which is unfit for
travel on a roadway or other vehicle path due to the vehicle being unlicensed, and or, having missing or defective
parts. This definition shall not be deemed to include farm machinery other than automobiles or trucks.
VEHICLE, OPERABLE UNLICENSED ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any vehicle which through parcel
size, condition, visibility, adverse impact, duration or location which has received a Temporary Zoning Certificate.
VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD. Fleet storage or other inactive vehicle storage and is not accessible to vehicular
traffic of the general public.
VEHICULAR USE AREA. All areas subject to vehicular traffic including parking lots, access-ways, loading areas
and service areas.
VETERINARY FACILITY. A structure or building set up for the medical care of animals, including offices, clinic
space and indoor kennels for detaining animals, but not expressly allowing outdoor kennel areas.
VIDEO GAME PARLOR. A place in which a collection of electronic, coin-operated games are played.
W ?
WALL. A high thick masonry structure forming a long rampart or an enclosure chiefly for defense, a structure to
hold back pressure.
WAREHOUSING. The indoor storage and/or sale of goods, materials, or merchandise for shipment to or
processing on other property.
WATERCOURSE. A course or channel in which water flows, consisting of bed, banks, and water; includes rivers,
creeks, and other streams confined in a channel, but not necessarily flowing all the time. Gullies, ravines, swales,
sloughs, and similar depressions do not ordinarily constitute watercourses.
WATERWAY. A body of water, such as a lake, pond, continuously flowing stream, creek, river, channel, or canal
which functions as a water route.
WHOLESALE. The sale of goods to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
WILDLIFE, EXOTIC. Indigenous or non-indigenous wildlife, including those animals that could be considered
dangerous but not limited to lions, tigers, ocelots, jaguars, leopards, mountain lions, cheetahs, lynx, bobcats,
jaguarundi, bears, hyenas, wolves or coyotes, or any life-threatening reptiles and arachnids, including but not
limited to crocodilians, poisonous reptiles and tarantulas.
Y ?
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
(See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the horizontal
distances from the main building (or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or
entranceway) to:
(a) the right-of-way line
(b) the easement line (where vehicular access to the lot is provided by a private street or a private drive)
(c) the terminus of the easement (where vehicular access to a panhandle lot is provided by a driveway
extending from the terminus of an easement located outside the panhandle area)
(d) the terminus of the panhandle (where vehicular access to a panhandle lot is provided by a driveway
extending from the terminus of the panhandle area or the terminus of an easement located inside the
panhandle area).
(See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the area of a lot between the side lot lines and being the horizontal
distances between the rear lot line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed
balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. (See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, REQUIRED. A front, side or rear yard that runs parallel to a property line, the depth of which shall be
determined by the minimum setbacks established for the zone district in which the lot is located. In measuring a
required yard for the purpose of determining the minimum width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the
depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line or applicable easement line and the
nearest portion of the main building or projection thereof (excluding the projection of the usual steps or
entranceway) external building projections shall be used. On panhandle lots, where the front yard is measured from
an easement line inside the panhandle area, the main building must also be setback from the property line of the
panhandle a distance not less than the minimum side yard requirement of the district. (See Appendix 1: Building
and Yard Requirements)
YARD, SIDE. A yard being the minimum horizontal distance between the main building or any projection thereof,
and the side line of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (See Appendix 1: Building and Yard
Requirements)
Z ?
ZONING CERTIFICATES. A written certification that a structure, use or parcel of land is, or will be in compliance
with the requirements of this Resolution, and in compliance with all other conditions of approval.
ZONING COMMISSION. An officially appointed body, formally known as the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission, whose principal duties are established in Section 19-2 of this Zoning Resolution. The Zoning
Commission is a commission of five Township residents appointed by the Trustees. The Planning & Zoning
Commission makes recommendations to the Trustees on all Township issues such as Zone Changes, Planned Unit
Developments, PUD Amendments, LASR's and to provide feedback for the Township corridor studies, land use
plan and specific public interest.
ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN. A site plan for the specific development and specific use of a parcel or tract of
real estate required to obtain a Zoning Certificate, as further described in Section 20-1.2 The Zoning Compliance
Plan shall show the specific use or uses, illustrated by a plat, drawn to scale, showing the boundaries of such parcel
or tract, the location, size, height and use of all existing structures, and the exact location and pertinent details of
proposed buildings, structures, signage, lighting, pedestrian ways, vehicular access, circulation patterns, parking
areas and buffering accompanied by a detailed description the plat identifying the impervious surface ratio, density
and requirements for yards, parking, landscaping and buffers, the existing and intended use of each building or part
of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, such other
information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary for the enforcement of this Resolution
and any other requirements as identified on the application form or forms provided by the Administrative Official.
All dimensions shown on these plats relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an
actual survey.
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICT AND ZONING MAP
3-1 DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the purposes of this Resolution, Sycamore Township is divided into the following zoning
districts:
(a) Residential Districts
? AA Residential ("Lowest" Density)
? A Residential
? A-2 Residential
? A-35 Residential
? B Residential
? B-2 Residential
? C Residential
? D Residential, Multi-Family ("Highest" Density)
(b) Commercial Districts
? O Office
? E Retail Business
(c) Industrial Districts
? F Industrial, Light
(d) Special Public Interest Overlay Districts
? SPI-NR Special Public Interest-Natural Resource
? SPI-NQ Special Public Interest-Neighborhood Quality
? SPI-SC Special Public Interest-Suburban Center/Corridor
? SPI-SV Special Public Interest-Suburban Village
(e) Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD)
(see applicability in Sections 1-6(e) and 18-2)
? PUD Planned Unit Development
(f) Specific Plan Districts
? CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay District
? DD Planned Multi-Family District
? OO Planned Office District
? EE Planned Retail District
? FF Planned Light Industrial District
3-2 TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES
The uses permissible with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate, a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, or a Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Zoning Certificate are summarized in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Table 3-2.
When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the designations “P”, “PUD-1”,
“PUD-2”, “C”, and “S-PUD” shall have the following meanings:
3-2.1 Permitted Use
The letter “P” means the use is permitted as-of-right in the indicated zoning district with a Permitted Use
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Zoning Inspector certifying that the plats and plans for the
proposed use comply with all applicable provisions of the Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution.
3-2.2 Planned Unit Development - 1
The designation “PUD-1” means that based upon the intensity of land use, established in conjunction with
Table 3-2, the Table of Permissible Uses, the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a PUD
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Zoning Inspector certifying:
(a) approval of a PUD Plan for the project area by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission pursuant to
Chapter 18; and
(b) approval of a Zoning Compliance Plan certifying that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with
all other applicable provisions of the Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of
approval.
3-2.3 Planned Unit Development - 2
The designation “PUD-2” means that based upon the intensity of land use, established in conjunction with
Table 3-2, the Table of Permissible Uses, the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a PUD
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Zoning Inspector certifying:
(a) approval of the proposed PUD-2 by the Board of Township Trustees because the proposed development
exceeds the maximum density or intensity of use established for PUD-1 approval pursuant to Chapter 18;
and
(b) that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.4 Conditional Use
The letter “C” means that the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, provided it is listed in
Table 17-12 in Chapter 17, in Table 3-2, the Table of Permissible Uses, or in any other part of this
Resolution, with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Zoning Inspector
certifying:
(a) approval of the proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the standards and
procedures set forth in Chapter 17, and
(b) that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.5 Specific PUD
The designation “S-PUD” means that the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a PUD
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Zoning Inspector certifying:
(a) approval of a zone amendment and PUD Plan for the specific use by the Board of Township Trustees
pursuant to Chapter 16 and Chapter 7, and
(b) that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES
Use
(See definitions in Chapter 2 for
further clarification)
Permissible Uses by District
AA-C D O E F CUP DD OO EE FF
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family Dwelling Unit
Detached P P PUD-1 PUD-1 SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
Detached in PUD’s (Patio, Zero-Lot-Line, and Clustered Dwelling Units)
Low density
(based on density of underlying
zone)
PUD-1 P PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate density (Max 9.7 DU/A) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High density (Max 14.5 DU/A) PUD-2 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Accessory Apartment C S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Bed and Breakfast C C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Day Care, Child - Type A C C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Day Care, Child - Type B P P PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Family Home P P PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Granny Cottage C C S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Group Home C C S-PUD S-PUD
Multi-Family
Low density (Max 7.26 DU/A) P PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate density (Max 9.7 DU/A) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High density (Max 14.5 DU/A) PUD-2 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Note:
The following multi-family uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity:
1. Apartments/Attached Condominiums 3. Dormitory, Fraternity, Sorority 5. Three-Family
2. Boarding House 4. Two-Family 6. Townhouse
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES (continued from previous page)
Use
(See definitions in Chapter 2 for further
clarification)
Permissible Uses by District
AA-C D O E F CU
P DD OO EE FF
COMMERCIAL USES
Office
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Note:
The following office uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity (except
as noted below*):
1. Accounting Services 9. *Medical Office/ Clinics (In the D District, this use is not permissible at any intensity)
2. Architectural Services 10. Motels and Hotels
3. Banking/Financial Institution 11. Optical Laboratories
4. Banking with Drive-In or Drive-Through
Facility
12. Professional Consulting Services
5. Dental Laboratories 13. Psychological Counseling
6. Funeral Home or Mortuary 14. Real Estate and Securities Brokering
7. Legal Services 15. *Restaurant/Bar within an office use (In the O District, this use is permissible only if
approved as a Conditional Use)
8. Medical Laboratories 16. Tax Preparation Services
Retail Business
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) PUD-1 P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Note:
The following retail business uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity:
1. Amusement Park 15. Drag Strips, Raceways 29. Racquet Facilities (Tennis or Other Indoor
Clubs)
2. Art Gallery, Antique Store, Interior Decorator
Service
16. Drive-In or Drive-Through Facility 30. Restaurant/Bar
3. Automobile and Truck Rental 17 Durable Goods, Furniture & Appliances, Sales &
Rental
31. Restaurant drive-in
4. Automobile Sales (Accessory Service) 18. Dry Cleaning 32. Retail Sales & Service
5. Automobile Service (mechanical) 19. Health & Fitness Facility 33. Service Establishments: Dry Cleaning or
Laundry Pick-up Stations, Print Shops, Tailoring,
Shoe or Hat Repair
6. Batting Cage 20. Gasoline Service Station (with repair) 34. Shopping Center
7. Barber Shops & Beauty Salon 21. Golf Driving Range 35. Skating Facility
8. Billiard Parlor or Pool Room 22. Grocery Store 36. Studio: Art, Dance, Gymnastics, Music
9. Bowling Alley 23. Gun Firing Range 37. Swimming pools, Tennis or Racquet Clubs, and
Similar Recreation Facilities Open To The Public
For A Fee
10. Building Materials, Sales & Distribution 24. Laundry 38. Tailoring
11. Car Wash, Full Service 25. Machinery, Boat, Truck, Farm & Construction
Equipment Sales, Rental & Service
39. Theater, Motion Picture or Live Performance
12. Car Wash, Self Service 26. Miniature Golf Course
13. Convenience Store (with gas pumps) 27. Motorcycle, Sales & Service
14. Delicatessens, Bakery Goods, Meat, Fruit &
Vegetable Markets
28. Photo Lab, Picture, TV, or Sound Studio
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35 A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES (continued from previous page)
Use
(See definitions in Chapter 2 for further
clarification)
Permissible Uses by District
AA-C D O E F CUP DD OO EE FF
INDUSTRIAL USES
Light Industry
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) PUD-1 PUD-1 P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) PUD-1 S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) PUD-2 S-PUD
Note: The following light industrial uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of
intensity (except as noted below):
1. Automobile Body Shop 5. Outside Storage
2. Heliport 6. Package Delivery Service, Truck Terminal, Taxicab Barn
3. Laundry, Dry Clean, Linen, Diaper Service (plant on premises) 7. Research Lab with hazardous materials
4. Manufacturing, Light (per definition of Light Industrial in Chapter 2) 8. Warehouse, Display Room for Wholesale Activities
Mini-Storage Facility
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Recycling Facility
Low Intensity (Max. ISR = .40) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .50) PUD-2 S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .50)
Transfer Station
Low intensity (Max. ISR = .40) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .50) PUD-2 S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .50)
Drop-off Center
Low intensity (Max. ISR = .40) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .50) PUD-2 S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .50)
Telecommunication Tower
(per procedures in ORC 519.211) C C C E X E M P T SPUD SPUD E X E M P T
Warehouse as Accessory Use C C S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Adult Entertainment Uses C
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES (continued from previous page)
Use
(See definitions in Chapter 2 for
further clarification)
Permissible Uses by District Planned Districts
AA-C D O E F CUP DD OO EE FF
AGRICULTURAL USES
See Chapter 3 and Table 3-10 for criteria concerning these permitted uses.
Rural Agriculture
(on lots greater than 5 acres) E X E M P T I N A L L D I S T R I C T S
Suburban Agriculture
(on lots not greater than 5 acres) P P P P P
Note:
The following suburban agriculture uses are permitted as-of-right in the zone districts indicated above with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate subject to
compliance with the regulations for Agricultural Uses in Chapter 3:
1. Aquaculture & Fishing
Lakes
5. Olericulture 9. Farm Markets (Accessory
Use)
13. Club Activities
2. Floriculture 6. Pomiculture 10. Beekeeping 14. Future Farmers of America Activities
3. Horticulture 7. Viticulture &
Winemaking
11. Keeping of Household Pets 15. Farming of Trees, Mushrooms, and Sod, Tobacco & Field
Crops
4. Ornamental Horticulture 8. Private Compost Piles 12. Kennel (private)
Other Suburban Agriculture (on lots not greater than 5 acres)
Greenhouses P P P
Farm Markets (Principal Use) P P
Keeping of Exotic Wildlife P P
Keeping of Livestock
ON LOTS GREATER THAN 1
ACRE
P P P P P
ON LOTS 1 ACRE OR LESS P P P
Kennel (Commercial)
ON LOTS GREATER THAN 1
ACRE
P P P P P
ON LOTS 1 ACRE OR LESS P P
Riding Stables
ON LOTS GREATER THAN 1
ACRE
P P P P P
ON LOTS 1 ACRE OR LESS P P P
Veterinary Facility (without outside run)
ON LOTS GREATER THAN 1
ACRE
P P P P P
ON LOTS 1 ACRE OR LESS P P P
Veterinary Facility (with outside run)
ON LOTS GREATER THAN 1
ACRE
P P P P P
ON LOTS 1 ACRE OR LESS P P
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES (continued from previous page)
Use
(See definitions in Chapter 2
for further clarification)
Permissible Uses
AA-C D O E F CUP DD OO EE FF
INSTITUTIONAL and PUBLIC SERVICE USES
INSTITUTIONAL
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Note:
The following institutional uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity (except as noted below):
1. Day Care Center, Child 2. Hospital 3. Continuing Care Retirement Facility
Other Institutional Uses
Cemetery C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Correctional Facility C S-PUD
Halfway House C S-PUD
Church
Low intensity (Max ISR = .45) C C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .60) PUD-1 PUD-1 P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (Max ISR over .65) PUD-2 PUD-2 P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Nursing and Convalescent Home
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) P P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65 PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
School (Pre-school, elementary, junior high, middle, high, vocational & professional)
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C C PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C C PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
University or College
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
PUBLIC SERVICE USES
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C C P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C C PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C C PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Note:
The following public service (government owned or operated) uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the
zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity:
1. Government Facility
2. Government Storage Yard
3. Library
4. Park and Ride Facility
5. Police and Fire Station
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
TABLE 3-2 – TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES (continued from previous page)
Use Permissible Uses by District
(See definitions in Chapter 2
for further clarification)
AA-C D O E F CUP DD OO EE FF
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL, and ENTERTAINMENT USES
Recreation, Community Facility - Private (nonprofit or privately owned and operated country clubs, swim and tennis facilities/clubs
and YMCA’s); also athletic fields and golf courses .
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50) C C P P P SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65) C C PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
High intensity (ISR over .65) C C PUD-2 PUD-2 PUD-2 SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
SPUD
Campground or Summer Camp
(Public or Private) C SPUD
Recreation Center, Internal
(Public or Private C P SPUD
SPUD
Recreation, Community Facility - Public (publicly owned or operated athletic fields, golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, parks,
playgrounds, wildlife reservations, forests, senior centers, and recreation centers)
All intensities P P P P P S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD S-PUD
Cultural and Entertainment Facility (museum, outdoor drama theater (not drive-in), botanical garden, and zoo)
Low intensity (Max ISR = .50)
Moderate intensity (Max ISR = .65)
High intensity (ISR over .65)
C
C
C
P
PUD-1
PUD-2
P
PUD-1
PUD-2
P
PUD-1
PUD-2
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
S-PUD
Notes for Table 3-2 - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
ZONING CERTIFICATES:
(designations and requirements)
See Section 3-2 for full explanation of
terms,
Ch. 7 regarding S-PUD’s, Ch.17
regarding Conditional Uses, and Ch.18
regarding PUD’s.
P = Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the Zoning Inspector
PUD-1 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative
approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C = Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and administrative approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative approval of a zoning
amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township Trustees.
ZONING
DISTRICTS:
AA-C = Single Family Residence Districts including AA, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, and
C
D = Multi-Family Residence District
CUP = Community Unit Plan Overlay District
O = Office District DD = Planned Multi-Family District
E = Retail Business District OO = Planned Office District
F = Light Industrial District EE = Planned Retail District
FF = Planned Light Industrial District
INTENSITY: ISR =
DU/A =
Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided by the area of the lot excluding right-ofway)
Dwelling Units per Acre
3-3 ZONING MAP
The Board of Township Trustees, upon recommendation of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, shall
adopt a Zoning Map, in accordance with Section 1-6, which shall set out and delineate the zoning districts
established by Section 3-1 with relation to all land within the jurisdiction of these regulations. The Zoning Map is
hereby designated, established and incorporated as part of these provisions, and the original, which shall be on file
at the office of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, shall be as much a part of these provisions as if it were
fully described in these provisions.
3-4 STATUS OF PLANNED DISTRICTS
Areas of the Township identified on the Zoning Map which are designated PUD, “DD” Planned Multiple Residence
District, “OO” Planned Office District, "EE" Planned Retail District, “FF” Planned Light Industrial District, and
“CUP” Community Unit Plan prior to the effective date of this Resolution shall continue to be designated as
planned development districts as authorized by Ohio Revise Code Section 519.022 and the covenants and
conditions as contained in the Resolution of approval and development plans approved and in effect at the time of
their development shall be retained. Adjustments and revisions shall be administered in accordance with procedures
provided for Specific Plan Districts in Section 7-7.
3-5 ADDITIONAL USE, HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this Section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Resolution.
3.5.0 Street Frontage Required
Except as permitted by other provisions of this resolution no lot shall be permitted unless it contains the
proper amount of street frontage as determined by the use tables of the applicable zoning district.
For single family residential uses, there shall be no more than one (1) principal use for such frontage.
Existing lots of record are exempt from the frontage requirement, provided they are not further subdivided.
Frontage along limited access right of way, interstate highways, or private roadways shall not be
considered as part of the required street frontage.
3.5.0.1 Cul-de-sac Roadway
On a cul-de-sac roadway, of a dedicated public street, the required frontage may be reduced to forty (40)
feet. The required forty (40) foot street frontage shall be measured at the street right-of-way completely on
the ball of the cul-de-sac.
3-5.1 Height of Institutions Related To Yards
Public or private service buildings, hospitals (except as otherwise provided), institutions or schools, when
permitted in a District, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet, and churches and temples
may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet if the building is setback from each
required yard line at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the District in which the building is built.
3-5.2 Height of Single Family Dwelling Related to Side and Rear Yard
Single-family dwellings in the “AA”, “A”, “A35”, “A-2”, “B” “B-2”, and “C” Residence District may be
increased in height by not more than ten (10) feet when the side and rear yards are increased over the yard
requirements of the District in which they are located by not less than ten (10) feet, but they shall not
exceed three (3) stories in height.
3-5.3 Structures Exempt from Height Limit
Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials, antennas, windmills, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, belfries, monuments, stacks, derricks, conveyors, stage tower or scenery lofts,
tanks, water towers, silos, farm buildings, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to any
lawful and safe height.
3-5.4 Rear Yard on Double Frontage Lots
Rear yard requirements for buildings on double frontage lots may be waived if an open space is provided
equivalent to the required front yard of the district. Such open space shall run parallel with the secondary
right-of-way line and shall contain no accessory structures.
3-5.5 Rear Yards Adjacent to Alleys
In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where the rear or side yard opens on an
alley, one half of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear or side yard as the case may be.
3-5.6 Construction in Required Yard
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except as otherwise provided in
Section 3-5 and except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of
awnings, bay windows, skylights, sill, belt courses, cornices, wing walls, and ornamental features
projecting not to exceed thirty (30) inches in “AA”, “A”, “A35”, “A-2” or “B” Residence Districts and not
to exceed eighteen (18) inches in all other Districts.
3-5.7 Low Projections in Required Front and Rear Yards
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, decks, patios, ornamental features and handicapped ramps who’s
base height (excluding railings) does not exceed (3) three feet above grade may project into a required
front or rear yard, but shall not be closer to any side lot line than the side yard requirement.
3-5.8 Commercial Awnings and Canopies in Required Yards
Awnings that do not project more than forty-eight (48) inches from the face of the building may project
into the required front or rear yard when such site is located in the “O”, “E”, and “F” districts. In the “E”
and “F” districts canopies may be erected over service station pump islands. No canopy shall be closer
than ten (10) feet to a front right-of-way line and shall not be more than eight (8) feet above the ground
above the ground.
3-5.9 Stairways and Balconies in Required Yards
Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies projecting into a yard not
more than five (5) feet and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted by the County
Building inspector when placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation but not closer than two (2) feet to
any lot line in any case.
3-5.10 Required Yard for Multiple Family Dwellings
For the purpose of the yard requirements, a two-family or multiple dwelling shall be considered as one
building occupying a single lot.
3-5.11 Projection of Porches and Patios in Required Front Yards
A covered, unenclosed or screened porch, or patio attached to the main structure may project into a front
yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet.
3-5.12 Front Yards on Infill Sites
Where forty (40%) percent or more of the lots in a subdivision are occupied by buildings, the minimum
front yard on any lot shall not be less than the average depths of the front yards of the two buildings on
each side and within one hundred (100) feet of such lot, or where there is a building within one hundred
(100) feet of the lot on one side only, the minimum front yard shall be the same as that of such adjacent
building, provided, however, that no yard shall be required to exceed seventy-five (75) feet in the “AA” or
“A” Residence Districts or to exceed fifty (50) feet in any other district requiring a front yard.
3-5.13 Limitation of One Main Building on Lot
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no
case shall there be more than one main building on a lot except as specifically provided hereinafter in
Section 3-5.14.
3-5.14 Yard Requirements Where Lot Includes More Than One Main Building
Where a lot is used for institutional, commercial, or industrial purposes, and where the zoning compliance
plan is specifically approved therefore by the Zoning Administrator, more than one main building may be
located on the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all yard and open space requirements at the
perimeter of the lot for the district in which the lot is located.
3-5.15 Fire Hydrants
All newly constructed single family residences shall be located within 500 feet of a functional fire hydrant.
There shall be direct, unobstructed access for fire apparatus between the fire hydrant and the dwelling.
The functionality of a fire hydrant shall be determined by the Sycamore Township EMS and Fire
Department.
3-5.16 Pan-Handle Lots, Residential Districts
Pan handle lots shall not be permitted except for when they are a part of a recorded residential subdivision
containing 4 (four) or more lots and have been approved by the Township Zoning Commission through the
PUD–1 process.
The minimum street frontage required for panhandle lots is determined by the Hamilton County
Subdivision Regulations, and the lot(s) must meet all lot area and setback requirements for the underlying
zoning district.
3-6 AGRICULTURE REGULATIONS
Except as hereinafter provided, nothing contained in this Resolution shall regulate the use of any land for
agricultural purposes or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for agricultural
purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, and no zoning certificate shall be required
for any such use, building or structure, except on lots that are five (5) acres or less in any platted subdivision, or any
unplatted subdivisions resulting in fifteen (15) or more lots, each smaller than five acres and contiguous or
separated only by right-of-way.
3-7 AGRICULTURAL USES
A building or premises shall be used only in accordance with the following requirements if listed as “permitted” in
Table 3-2:
3-7.1 Agricultural Setback
Agriculture on lots as provided in this section provided any buildings, structures, exterior storage, refuse,
or supplies shall be at least sixty (60) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence or
office districts and further provided that specific agricultural uses listed in this article shall comply with
specific standards for such uses.
3-7.2 Greenhouse Setback
Greenhouses on lots as provided in this section shall be at least sixty (60) feet from every property line of
adjacent parcels in residence or office districts, provided any exterior storage or refuse or supplies and the
heating plant shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in
residence districts.
3-7.3 Agricultural Accessory Uses
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses including:
(a) Compost piles or bins, on lots as provided in section 3-6, which are located in the rear yard and at least three
(3) feet from every property line.
(b) Roadside stands, or farm markets, on lots as provided in section 3-6, where 50 percent or more of the gross
income received from the market is derived from produce raised on farms owned or operated by the market
operator in a normal crop year and provided that the structure shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square
feet and such structure and parking areas shall be at least sixty (60) feet from every property line of adjacent
parcels in residence districts; and that a sign advertising such products shall not exceed twelve (12) square
feet in area.
3-8 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY REGULATIONS
Except as hereinafter provided, nothing contained in this Resolution shall prohibit the use of any land for dairying,
and animal and poultry husbandry or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for such
agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, and no zoning certificate shall be
required for any such use, building, or structure, except on lots that are five (5) acres or less in any platted
subdivision, or any unplatted subdivisions resulting in fifteen (15) or more lots, each smaller than five acres and
contiguous or separated only by right-of-way, and where, if the lot is greater than one (1) acre, at least 35% of the
lots are developed.
3-9 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY USES
A building or premises shall be used only in accordance with the following requirements if listed as “permitted” in
Table 3-2.
3-9.1 Veterinary Facilities and Animal Care
Veterinary facilities, riding stables or commercial kennels for the boarding of animals, dairying and other
animal and poultry husbandry activities on lots as provided in section 3-8 provided that the use is located
on a lot that is greater than one (1) acre and further provided that floor area shall not exceed three thousand
(3,000) square feet and that buildings and enclosures (including fencing) for animals and manure piles, pits
or bins, or other outdoor storage, and parking areas for five or more vehicles shall be at least one hundred
(100) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence or office districts.
3-9.2 Veterinary Facilities in Office Districts
In the “O” Office District, veterinary facilities are permitted only without outside runs.
3-9.3 Veterinary Facilities in Retail Districts
In the “E” Retail Business District, veterinary facilities or other animal care facilities, including livery
stables, riding academies, and grooming parlors, on lots as provided in Section 3.8, are permitted if any
outside animal enclosure or outside run is at least one hundred (100) feet to any property line of adjacent
parcels in residence or office districts.
3-9.4 Agricultural Accessory Uses
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the uses in section 3.8, including:
(a) Household Pet Enclosures. The keeping of household pets provided, however, that any exterior enclosure in
which household pets are kept shall be located in the rear yard and such enclosure (except property line
fences) shall be at least twenty (20) feet from every property line.
(b) Livestock Enclosures. The keeping of livestock, on lots as provided in section 3-8, provided, however, that
any such accessory buildings or enclosures (including all fences), for such animals or fowl, other than
household pets, shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from every property line.
(c) Private Kennel Enclosures. Private kennels, on lots as provided in Section 3-8, provided that any exterior
enclosure (including fences constructed solely for the purpose of confining animals) in which household pets
are kept shall be located in the rear yard and at least twenty (20) feet from every property line of adjacent
parcels.
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-1.1 Statement of Intent
The Residential Districts are intended to provide a range of housing choices to meet the needs of Sycamore
Township’s residents, and, to offer a balance of housing types and densities, while promoting harmonious
development of residential communities in the Township and to help implement housing policies and other
plans adopted by the Township.
4-1.2 Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, C, and D Districts
subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.
4-1.3 Conditional Uses
Conditional uses in Residential districts are listed in the Table in Section 3-2. Further information on the
criteria, standards, and procedures for conditional uses are contained in Chapter 17.
4-1.4 Signs
Signs that are permitted in the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, C, and D districts are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 13.
4-1.5 Lot Area, Lot Width, Building Height and Yard Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the A-A, A, A35,A-2, B, B-2, C, and D districts shall comply with the
following provisions and the lot area, lot width, building height and yard requirements set forth in the
Tables in Section 4-6 and 4-7 found at the end of this Chapter.
(a) Front Yard Setback Alignment with Adjacent Lots. Alignment setbacks and/or front yard depths are not
required to exceed the average minimum depths of the existing front yards on the lots adjacent to them on
each side, if the lots are within the same block and within one hundred (100) feet of each other.
(b) Front Yard Requirements on Corner Lots. Lots that have a double frontage are required to have a front yard
on both streets. These lots located at the intersection of two or more streets are referred to as corner lots.
However, the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than forty (40) feet. No accessory
building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street.
Additional height and yard requirements and exceptions are contained in Section 3-5.
4-1.6 Parking Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, C, and D districts shall comply with the
parking requirements set forth in Chapter 12.
4-1.7 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection.
All uses and structures in the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2, C, and D Districts shall comply with the
provisions of Chapters 14, 15 and any other appropriate Chapter.
4-2 THE “A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2 AND C” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4-2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2 and C districts established by Section 3-1, is to protect and
support the development of single-family housing in conjunction with appropriate accessory uses and
public and institutional uses. The standards of these districts are intended to maintain a suitable
environment for family living at various densities and in various types of housing, including single-family
detached and clustered housing under specified conditions which provides flexibility in the organization of
site elements and building location.
4-2.2 Permitted Uses
The uses specified as Permitted ("P") Uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in Section
3-2 are permitted as of right in the A-A, A, A35, A-2, B, B-2 and C districts with a Permitted Use Zoning
Certificate provided they comply with all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable
requirements of this Resolution.
4-2.3 Planned Unit Developments
In addition to the uses specified as Planned Unit Developments ("PUD") in the Table of Permissible Uses
found in the Table in Section 3-2, the following densities are permitted in the A-A, A, A-2, B, B-2 and C
districts as PUD’s provided they are approved as PUD-1’s by the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission pursuant to the standards and procedures for planned unit developments set forth in Chapter
18 and in Section 4-2.5 and comply with all other applicable requirements of this Resolution. For
calculation of density on preliminary plans where actual location and area of rights-of-way or easements
for public streets is not yet determined, the net density shall be based on 82% of the gross area.
(a) A-A District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 1.0 unit per acre.
(b) A District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 2.17 units per acre.
(c) A-2 District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 3.11 units per acre.
(d) B District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 4.1 units per acre.
(e) B-2 District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 5.8 units per acre.
(f) C District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 7.26 units per acre.
4-2.4 Maximum Height and Minimum Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements
The maximum height and minimum lot area, bulk and yard, and accessory building requirements for low
density residential uses in the A-A, A, A-2, B, B-2, and C Districts are set forth in the Table in Section 4-6
found at the end of this Chapter.
4-2.5 Single Family Planned Unit Development (PUD) Standards for Patio, Zero-
Lot-Line and Single-Family Detached, Clustered Dwellings
Subject to the provisions of Section 4-2.3, as applicable, developments of patio dwellings, zero-lot-line
dwellings and clustered dwellings shall comply with the density requirements for single-family detached
dwellings for the residential district in which they are located and the minimum lot size, bulk and other site
development requirements set forth below. Minimum perimeter setbacks shall conform to district setback
requirements.
(a) Patio Dwelling. The lot of each dwelling unit shall be fully enclosed by a solid wall located at the lot line,
broken only by a driveway or a pedestrian access, in order to create a private yard between the dwelling and
the wall. All such walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. If a patio dwelling is located on a lotline,
that portion of the dwelling wall located on the lot-line may be counted as part of the required patio wall.
The minimum standards for a patio dwelling are as follows:
Minimum Lot Size(sq. ft.): 2,700
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 38
Minimum Patio Area (sq. ft.): 750
Minimum Patio Area Width (ft.): 25
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access easement
Front Load Garage (ft): 20
Dwelling or Side Load Garage (ft.): 10
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
PATIO DWELLINGS
(b) Zero-Lot-Line Dwelling. Each dwelling shall be located on an individual lot which is set on, or within five
(5) feet of the side lot line. No windows shall be located on the wall of the dwelling nearest to the side lot
line. Either a five (5) foot maintenance easement shall be provided on the neighboring property, or the
dwelling may be set back five (5) feet from the line and a recreation, planting, and use easement may be
granted to the adjacent lot owner. The minimum standards for a zero-lot-line dwelling are as follows:
Minimum Lot area (sq. ft.): 5,000
Minimum Interior Yards
Front (ft.): 20
Rear (ft.): 30
Side (ft.): 10 a
Minimum Building Spacing (ft.): 10 b
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 45
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access easement (ft.) 20
a
Standard applicable when units are set back from the lot line and a
use/maintenance easement is provided.
b
Standard applicable when units are set back from the lot line and a
use/maintenance easement is provided.
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
ZERO-LOT-LINE DWELLING
(c) Clustered Dwellings. Each dwelling type consists of a single-family detached residence located on an
individual lot which has private yards on all sides of the house. The minimum standards for single-family
detached clustered dwellings other than the types specified in Sections 4-2.5(a) and (b) are:
Minimum Lot area (sq. ft.): 6,000
Minimum Interior Yards
Front (ft.): 20
Rear (ft.): 25
Side (ft.): 8
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 50
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access easement (ft.) 20
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
CLUSTERED DWELLINGS
4-3 “D” MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4-3.1 Purpose
The purpose of the D Multi-Family district is to provide opportunities for low to high density residential
development where sufficient infrastructure is available or will be available prior to development. This
district permits a broad range of housing types including single-family and multi-family dwellings as well
as low-intensity uses that retain a residential character.
4-3.2 Permitted Uses
In addition to the uses specified as Permitted ("P") in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in
Section 3-2, low intensity residential uses are permitted as of right in the D district (at net densities of 7.3
dwelling units or less per acre) with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided that they comply with all
requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
4-3.3 Planned Unit Developments
In addition to the uses specified as Planned Unit Developments ("PUD") in the Table of Permissible Uses
found in Section 3-2 the following types of residential developments are permitted in the D district at
intensities listed in Section 3-2 as Planned Unit Developments provided they are approved as PUD-1’s by
the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, or as PUD-2’s by the Board of Township Trustees if the
proposed development exceeds any of the moderate land use intensity standards enabling PUD-1 approval.
PUD’s are subject to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18 provided they comply with all
other applicable requirements of this Resolution:
(a) Single-Family Detached Dwellings in PUD’s.
(b) Multi-Family Dwellings
(1) Apartment style
(2) Two Family
(3) Three Family
(4) Townhouse
4-3.4 Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard Requirements
The minimum lot area, lot width, bulk and yard requirements for low intensity residential and office uses in
the D district are found in the Table in Section 4-6.
4-3.5 Maximum Building Height
The maximum building height permitted in the D district, exclusive of developments approved through the
PUD procedure, for principal buildings, is as per Section 4-6. Maximum height for accessory structures
shall be one story or 15 feet, whichever is less.
4-3.6 Standards for Townhouse Dwellings
Rows of attached townhouses shall be no more than twelve (12) dwelling units each. The minimum
standards for a townhouse dwelling are as follows:
Minimum Lot Area: (sq. ft. per unit) 2,400
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 18
Minimum Yards (per structure)
Front (ft.): 20
Rear (ft): 30
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access easement (ft.) 20
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS
TABLE 4-6
LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH,MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR LOW DENSITY
USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONS DISTRICTS
A-A A A-2 B B-2 C D A35
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
I. Principal Building
A. Stories (whichever is less) 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.5 2.5
B. Feet (whichever is less) 35 35 35 35 35 35 45 35
LOT REQUIREMENTS
I. Minimum Lot Size Per Unit
A. Single-family detached (sq. ft.) 43,560 20,000 14,000 10,500 7,500 6,000 6,000 35,000
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (sq. ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 6,000 NA
2. Two-Family (sq. ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 6,000 NA
3. Three-Family (sq. ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 6,000 NA
4. Townhouse (sq. ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 6,000 NA
II. Minimum Lot Width
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 150 100 80 70 60 50 50 100
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 100 NA
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 80 NA
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 90 NA
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 18 NA
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
I. Front Yard
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 50 50 40 35 35 30 30 50
B Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 30 NA
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 30 NA
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 30 NA
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA † NA
II. Side Yards (each)
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 25 15 10 8 5 5 15
1. Total 13
2. Minimum 5
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 10 NA
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 8 NA
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 10 NA
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA † NA
III. Rear Yard
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 60 35 35 35 30 30 30 35
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 40 NA
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 30 NA
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA 30 NA
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA † NA
NOTE: * Subject to the standards contained in Chapter 4, Section 4-4.
† Subject to the specific townhouse standards contained in Chapter 4, Section 4-3.6.
TABLE 4-7
LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH,MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED DWELLINGS IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD’S)
DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONS A-A A A-2 B B-2 C D
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Principal Building
Stories (whichever is less) 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.5
Feet (whichever is less) 35 35 35 35 35 35 45
LOT REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Size Per Unit
Patio dwelling (sq. ft.) 2,700 2,700 2,700 2,700 2,700 2,700 2,700
Zero-lot-line (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Clustered (sq. ft.) 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000
Minimum Lot Width
Patio dwelling (ft.) 38 38 38 38 38 38 38
Zero-lot-line (ft.) 45 45 45 45 45 45 45
Clustered (ft.) 50 50 50 50 50 50 50
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Yard
Patio dwelling (ft.) See Section
Zero-lot-line (ft.)
Clustered (ft.) 4-2.5 for Additional
Side Yards (each)
Patio dwelling (ft.) Single Family
Zero-lot-line (ft.)
Clustered (ft.) Planned Unit
Rear Yard
Patio dwelling (ft.) Development
Zero-lot-line (ft.)
Clustered (ft.) Standards
CHAPTER 5
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1.2 Statement of Intent
The Commercial Districts, which include the O Office district and the E Retail Business district, are
intended to provide controlled and harmonious settings for office developments and business/commercial
developments, to enhance employment opportunities, to encourage the efficient use of land, to enhance
property values and the tax base, to encourage high quality of design in office and business/commercial
developments, and to help implement land use plans, thoroughfare plans and corridor studies adopted by
the Township.
5-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions
(a) Mechanical Equipment to be Screened. All ground level and roof top mechanical equipment visible from
public streets and residential districts or any districts with permitted residential uses shall be screened.
(b) Refuse Control. Temporary storage of refuse materials shall be limited to that produced on the premises.
Refuse containers must be covered and shall be stored within completely enclosed buildings or placed in
corrals providing complete screening from public streets and residential districts or any districts with
permitted uses in accordance with Chapter 10, Section 10-5.
(c) Sensory and Nuisance Impacts. Processes, equipment, and goods for sale shall be limited to those that are
not objectionable to the enjoyment and use of adjoining and adjacent zoning lots which are within 600 feet,
because of odor, dust, smoke, gases, vapors, noise, light, vibration, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
Noise levels must be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line, at locations zoned or used
for residential purposes, to exceed 62 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and 52
decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Any use or dissemination of sensory or fire, explosive, or radioactive material in a manner or quantity that
endangers the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
unlawful.
(d) Lighting. On site lighting shall be located, directed or designed in such a manner as to contain and direct
light and glare only to the property on which it is located in accordance with Chapter 12, Section 12-7.
(e) Permanent Outdoor Storage or Display.
(1) The outdoor storage or display of merchandise materials or inventory shall not encroach into areas of
required parking.
(2) The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not be located in any
required pervious surface area within the lot.
(3) The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not include the use of
banners, pennants or strings of pennants.
(4) Outdoor storage areas shall be required to be fully screened with opaque fencing not to exceed eight (8)
feet in height.
5-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the O district and E district subject to the provisions of
Chapter 10.
5-1.4 Conditional Uses
Conditional uses in the Commercial districts are listed in Section 3-2. Further information on the criteria,
standards, and procedures for conditional uses is contained in Chapter 17.
5-1.5 Planned Unit Developments
The uses specified as Planned Unit Developments, PUD-1’s in the Table of Permissible Uses found in
Section 3-2 require approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission pursuant to the standards
and procedures for Planned Unit Developments set forth in Chapter 18 and all other applicable
requirements of this Resolution. Proposed office and retail uses whose intensity exceeds the maximums
indicated in Section 3-2 for PUD-1’s require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees pursuant
to Chapter 18.
5-1.6 Signs
Signs are permitted in the O district and E district subject to the provisions of Chapter 13.
5-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the O district and E district shall comply with the lot area, bulk and
yard requirements set forth in Section 5-5 found at the end of this Chapter. Additional bulk and yard
requirements and exceptions are contained in Section 3-5.
5-1.8 Parking Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the O district and E district shall comply with the parking requirements
set forth in Chapter 12.
5-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection
All uses and structures permitted in the O district and E district shall comply with the provisions of
Chapters 14 and 15.
5-2 THE “O” [OFFICE] DISTRICT
5-2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the O district established by Section 3-1, is to provide locations that are suitable for the
establishment and operation of professional, institutional and governmental office uses.
5-2.2 Permitted Uses
The uses defined as low intensity office uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Section 3-2 are
permitted as of right in the O district with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided they comply with
all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
5-3 THE “E” [RETAIL/BUSINESS] DISTRICT.
5-3.1 Purpose
The purpose of the E district established by Section 3-1 is to provide for general business uses and other
uses listed in Section 3-2 that tend to locate along highways with relatively high traffic volumes and that
cater to the general public.
5-3.2 Permitted Uses
The uses defined as low intensity commercial uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Section 3-2
are permitted as of right in the E district with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided they comply
with all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
TABLE 5-4 -DELETED
TABLE 5-5
LOT AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS FOR LOW
INTENSITY USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT
REQUIREMENT 2
O
OFFICE
DISTRICT
E
RETAIL BUSINESS
DISTRICT
A. MAXIMUM HEIGHT
1. Principal Building
A. Height (ft.) 35 35
2. Accessory Structures
A. Stories (whichever less) 1 1
B. Height (ft.) 15 15
B. LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 20,000 20,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 100 100
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS 1
1. Front Yard (ft.) 40 30
2. Side Yards (ft. each) 10 10
3. Rear Yard (ft.) 20 20
D. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO2 .50 .50
NOTES:
1 Also see buffer yard requirements in Chapter 14.
2 These standards may be exceeded up to the maximums specified in Section 3-2, if approved as a PUD-1 with appropriate
modifications in the above standards pursuant to Chapter 18. Proposed commercial uses that exceed PUD-1 standards in
Section 3-2 shall require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees with appropriate modifications on the above
standards pursuant to Chapter 18.
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-1.1 Statement of Intent
The Industrial district is intended to provide appropriate locations for fabrication, processing, packaging,
distribution, storage, and other transportation activities contributing to the economic base of the Township,
to enhance employment opportunities, to encourage the efficient use of land, to enhance property values
and the tax base, to improve the design quality of industrial areas, and to help implement land use plans,
thoroughfare plans and corridor studies adopted by the Township.
6-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions in the Industrial Districts
(a) Mechanical Equipment to be Screened. All ground level and roof top mechanical equipment visible from
public streets and residential districts or any districts with permitted residential uses shall be screened.
(b) Refuse Control. Refuse containers must be covered and shall be stored within completely enclosed buildings
or placed in corrals providing screening from public streets and residential districts or any districts with
permitted uses in accordance with Chapter 10, Section 10-5.
(c) Sensory and Nuisance Impacts. Processes, equipment operations and goods for sale shall be limited to those
that are not objectionable to the enjoyment and use of adjoining and adjacent zoning lots which are within
600 feet, because of odor, dust, smoke, gases, vapors, noise, light, vibration, refuse matter or water-carried
waste.
Noise levels must be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line, at locations zoned or used
for residential purposes, to exceed 62 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and 52
decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Any use or dissemination of sensory or fire, explosive, or radioactive material in a manner or quantity that
endangers the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is a public nuisance and declared unlawful.
(d) Lighting. On site lighting shall be located, directed or designed in such a manner as to contain and direct
light and glare in accordance with Chapter 12, Section 12-7.
(e) Permanent Outdoor Storage or Display.
(1) The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, materials or inventory shall not encroach into areas of
required parking.
(2) The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not be located in any
required pervious surface area within the lot.
(3) The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not include the use of
banners, pennants, or strings of pennants.
(4) Outdoor storage areas in the F District shall be required to be screened by a solid wall or fencing
(including solid entrance and exit gates) not to exceed eight (8) feet in height.
6-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the F district subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.
6-1.4 Conditional Uses
Conditional uses in the Light Industrial District are listed in Section 3-2. Further information on the
criteria, standards, and procedures for conditional uses are contained in Chapter 17.
6-1.5 Planned Unit Developments
The uses specified as Planned Unit Developments (PUD-1’s) in the Table of Permissible Uses found in
Section 3-2 require approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission pursuant to the standards and
procedures for Planned Unit Developments set forth in Chapter 18 and all other applicable requirements of
this Resolution. Proposed industrial uses whose intensity exceeds the maximums indicated in Section 3-2
for PUD-1’s shall require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees pursuant to Chapter 18.
6-1.6 Signs
Signs are permitted in the F district subject to the provisions of Chapter 13.
6-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the F district shall comply with the lot area, bulk and yard requirements
set forth in Section 6-5 found at the end of this Chapter.
6-1.8 Parking Standards
All uses and structures permitted in the F district shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in
Chapter 12.
6-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection.
All uses and structures permitted in the F district shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14 and 15.
6-2 THE “F” [LIGHT INDUSTRIAL] DISTRICT
6-2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the F district established by Section 3-1 is to create and protect areas for light
manufacturing, processing, storage, wholesaling and distribution operations serving primarily local needs.
The standards in this district are designed to provide for the establishment and operation of light industrial
uses in a manner that minimizes conflict between industrial uses and nearby residential areas and nonindustrial
uses.
6-2.2 Permitted Uses
The uses defined as low intensity light industrial uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Section 3-
2, are permitted as of right in the F district with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided that they
comply with all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
TABLE 6-5
LOT AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS FOR USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT
REQUIREMENT F DISTRICT
A. MAXIMUM HEIGHT 2
1. Principal Building
a. Height (ft.) 35
2. Accessory Structures
a. Stories (whichever less) 1
b. Height (ft.) 15
B. LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 20,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 100
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS 1, 2
1. Front Yard (ft.) 40
2. Side Yards (Ft. each) 0
3. Rear Yard (ft.) 10
D. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO 2 .50
NOTES:
1 See buffer yard requirements in Chapter 14.
2 These standards may be exceeded up to the maximums specified in Section 3-2, if approved as a PUD-1 with appropriate
modifications in the above standards pursuant to Chapter 18. Proposed industrial uses that exceed PUD-1 standards in
Section 3-2 shall require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees with appropriate modifications on the above
standards pursuant to Chapter 18.

CHAPTER 7
SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1.1 Statement of Intent
Specific Plan Districts are intended to promote the general public welfare, encourage the efficient use of
land and resources, promote greater efficiency in providing public and utility services, and encourage
innovation in the planning and building of all types of development. Within a Specific Plan District, the
Township zoning, subdivision, and platting regulations need not be uniform, but may vary in order to
accommodate unified development and to promote the purposes of Specific Plan Districts.
7-1.2 Impact Controls
Noise levels must be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line, at locations zoned or used
for residential purposes, to exceed 62 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and 52
decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
7-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
Except as otherwise provided in the specific regulations pertaining to each district, accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Specific Plan Districts subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.
7-1.4 Signs
Except as otherwise provided in the specific regulations pertaining to each district, signs shall be permitted
in the Specific Plan Districts subject to the provision of Chapter 13. The sign standards and regulations for
the O, E, and F districts shall apply respectively to the OO, EE, and FF, Districts except as otherwise
provided by the resolution approving the Specific Plan District. The sign standards and regulations for the
Residential districts shall apply to the CUP and DD Districts except as otherwise provided by the
resolution approving the Specific Plan District.
7-1.5 Parking Standards
Except as otherwise provided in the specific regulations pertaining to each district, all uses and structures
permitted in the Specific Plan Districts shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in Chapter 12.
7-1.6 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection
Except as otherwise provided in the specific regulations pertaining to each district, all uses and structures
permitted in the Specific Plan Districts shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14, 15 and any other
applicable Chapters.
7-2 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS [“DOUBLE LETTER” DISTRICTS”]
7-2.1 Purpose.
The purpose of Specific Plan Districts is to encourage innovative design and efficiency in the use of land,
resources and utilities on sites where, at the election of the property owner, a legally binding and unified
plan for the specific use and specific development of the tract assures a harmonious relationship with
existing and potential development of the surrounding property. The Specific Plan Districts enable
property to be developed under flexible standards based on public review and legislative approval of a
comprehensive site plan without the need to conform to uniform zoning requirements of traditional zoning
districts.
7-2.2 Classification
Specific Plan Districts shall be classified by categories, according to the provisions as described herein,
and each adopted Specific Plan District shall be shown on the official Zoning Map. The six categories of
Specific Plan Districts include:
(a) CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay Districts (single-family)
(b) DD Planned Multiple Residence Districts
(c) OO Planned Office Districts
(d) EE Planned Business Districts
(e) FF Planned Light Industrial Districts
7-2.3 Procedure for District Designation
(a) Applicant. The owner or owners of a tract of land, in accordance with the zone amendment procedures in
Chapter 16, shall submit a PUD Plan for the use and development of such tract for the purposes of, and
meeting the requirements set forth in, this chapter.
(b) Approval Criteria. In determining whether a Specific Plan District shall be approved or recommended for
approval, the Zoning Administrator, Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, and Board of Township
Trustees should consider the Standards for Amendments (Section 16-4), the Standards for PUD Plans
(Section 18-7) and the guidelines for each Specific Plan District in Appendix 6.
(c) Property Owner Acceptance, Recording and Certification of Compliance. The PUD Plan and supplemental
regulations contained in the Resolution of approval by the Board of Township Trustees shall be incorporated
in the Amendment to the Zoning Resolution as an integral part of the zoning regulations applicable to the real
estate in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) Within ten days after the close of the public hearing by the Board of Township Trustees, or as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, the property owner shall submit a PUD plan no more than
thirty (30) days, to the Zoning Administrator , incorporating the following on the plan:
? all revisions to the proposed PUD Plan and all conditions, covenants and related revisions as may
be required by the recommendations of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and as
modified by majority vote of the Township Trustees, and
? a Deed of Acceptance of the PUD Plan and the Amendment executed by the owner of the real
estate.
(2) Within ten days after receipt of the revised PUD Plan and executed Deed of Acceptance, the Board of
Township Trustees shall act on the proposed Amendment pursuant to Section 16-5.7.
(3) After the effective date of the zoning amendment, the clerk of the Board of Township Trustees shall
cause such Amendment to be recorded in the land records applicable to the real estate in the office of the
Recorder of Hamilton County.
(d) Zoning Compliance Plan. After the zoning amendment is recorded, the property owner must submit a
Zoning Compliance Plan pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18-8 for obtaining a Zoning
Certificate.
7-2.4 Permissible Uses
The uses specified in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in Section 3-2 may be permitted in
Specific Plan Districts provided that the district shall be laid out and developed as a unit according to a
PUD (planned unit development) Plan, as defined in Chapter 2, approved for the specific use or uses and
that the plan complies with all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
7-2.5 Lot Area, Bulk, Height, and Yard Requirements
Except as modified by the Board of Township Trustees’ Resolution of approval for any Specific Plan
District, the maximum height and bulk, and the minimum lot area and yard requirements shall be as
follows:
(a) The requirements for the “CUP” Overlay district shall be the same as the underlying single-family Residence
district shown in Table 4-7 and Section 4-2.5. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to enable modification
of the maximum net density for single family districts pursuant to Section 4-2.3.
(b) The requirements for the “DD” district shall be the same as the “D” district shown in Table 4-6 except that
maximum density for each Planned Multiple Residence district shall be set forth in the Board of Township
Trustees’ Resolution of approval.
(c) The requirements for the “OO” district shall be the same as the “O” district shown in Table 5-5.
(d) The requirements for the “EE” district shall be the same as the “E” district shown in Table 5-5.
(e) The requirements for the “FF” district shall be the same as the “F” district shown in Table 6-5
7-2.6 Supplemental Regulations
The standards for each Specific Plan District adopted by the Board of Township Trustees may further
restrict the regulations for land use and may relax or further restrict the regulations for lot area, coverage,
density, floor area, setback, parking, height, fencing, landscaping or other specific development standards
for each Specific Plan District upon finding that conditions peculiar to a specific site and the achievement
of the Standards for Amendments (Section 16-4) and Standards for PUD Plans (Section 18-7) require
supplemental regulations. Any such supplemental regulations shall be set forth in the Resolution
establishing such Specific Plan District or in an amendment thereto.
7-2.7 Violation of Supplemental Regulations and PUD Plan
The supplemental regulations, including conditions, covenants and the PUD Plan, for each Specific Plan
District approved in accordance with this Chapter shall be an integral part of the Zoning Resolution and
any departure or any modification, except when specifically approved in accordance with Section 18-9,
shall be a violation of the Zoning Resolution and shall be subject to the provisions and penalties prescribed
therefore in Chapter 24.
7-2.8 Adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans and PUD Plans
Adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans and PUD Plans pertaining to Specific Plan Districts shall be filed
and processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18-9.
7-2.9 Appeals
The appeal of administrative decisions pertaining to Specific Plan Districts shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18-10.
CHAPTER 8
SPECIAL PUBLIC INTERST [SPI] OVERLAY DISTRICTS
8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
8-1.1 Statement of Intent
An overlay district is intended to provide supplemental regulations or standards pertaining to specific
geographic features or land uses, wherever these are located, in addition to, but not necessarily more
restrictive than the "base" or underlying zoning district regulations applicable within a designated area.
Whenever there is a conflict between the regulations of a base zoning district and those of an overlay
district, the overlay district regulations control.
8-1.2 Definition
A Special Public Interest (SPI) District is defined as a geographic area exhibiting or planned to contain
special and distinctive characteristics that are of significant value or importance to the public. These
characteristics include natural phenomena such as unique geologic strata, soil formations, slopes,
vegetation, water flow, significant scenic views or other similar natural features, or have physical
development features such as substantial public investment in public improvements or community plans
that coordinate public and private investment, or have characteristics that include institutional uses or
neighborhood support services in residential neighborhoods or village developments in suburban
metropolitan areas. An SPI district shall be classified according to an SPI category type, and the
characteristics of each SPI district shall be in accord with the characteristics of its type as described in this
Chapter.
8-1.3 Purposes
The purposes of SPI regulations are to assist the development of land and structures to be compatible with
a larger planning area beyond the immediate vicinity of the site and to protect or improve the quality of the
environment in those locations where the characteristics of the environment or the amount of public
investment are of significant public interest and are vulnerable to damage or loss of public opportunity by
the cumulative effect of development in such planning areas permitted under conventional zoning
regulations. SPI regulations are required to protect the public and property owners in the district:
(a) From blighting influences that might be incrementally caused, extended or worsened by the application of
conventional land use regulations to properties and areas of sensitive and special public interest;
(b) From significant damage to neighborhoods that contain large institutional and other nonresidential uses or
support services;
(c) From significant damage or destruction of prominent wetlands, floodplains, hillsides and/or valleys or other
natural resources caused by improper development thereof;
(d) From significant damage to the economic value and efficiency of operation of existing properties and/or new
developments due to the interdependence of their visual and functional relationships;
(e) From soil erosion, stream situation and development on unstable land;
(f) From the loss or destruction of mature and/or valuable trees and other natural resources;
(g) From the detrimental cumulative effects of incremental development decisions in suburban centers, corridors,
neighborhoods and villages on:
(1) conservation and correction of the character, integrity, safety, access and circulation.
(2) preservation and enhancement of pedestrian safety and views from the public right-of-way.
(3) balance of convenience and compatibility between residential and nonresidential areas.
(4) coordination of useful and attractive signage and streetscape elements.
(5) minimization of traffic congestion and coordination of land use intensity with local capacities and goals.
8-1.4 Identification
The location of all SPI districts shall be shown on the Zoning Map as an overlay zone superimposed in
specific areas over existing zoning district areas.
8-1.5 Applicability
Except as otherwise provided herein and in other sections of this Zoning Resolution, all regulations of the
underlying zoning districts shall apply to and control property in the SPI district. However, in the case of
conflict between the provisions of an underlying zoning district and an SPI district, the provisions of the
SPI district shall prevail. The adoption of an SPI district shall not have any affect on a previously
approved zoning certificate or PUD Plan during the period of validity of such approval.
8-1.6 Creation
The Board of Township Trustees may, from time to time, create SPI districts as defined and containing the
characteristics, as set forth in Sections 8-2 through 8-5 of this Chapter.
8-1.7 Procedure
The establishment or adoption of SPI districts shall be in accordance with the following procedures.
(a) Adoption of Special Public Interest Strategy. Prior to the submittal of an application for initiation of a zoning
amendment or supplement for a Special Public Interest (SPI) Overlay District, an SPI strategy shall be duly
adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission. The strategy shall contain:
? a boundary map for the proposed overlay district,
? justifications for establishment of the proposed overlay district standards and boundaries including
development goals and policies for the area within the proposed boundary, and
? the specific supplemental standards proposed for achieving the SPI strategy.
The strategy shall describe in words and/or illustrations the special and distinctive characteristics of public interest
that are to be protected, improved or achieved and the related specific and measurable standards or development
features that will be required for coordinated implementation of the plan. The SPI Strategy may contain goals,
policies and standards for the following physical elements: location of buildings; architectural character of
buildings; signage; public spaces; streetscape; building and land use mix, diversity and unifying elements;
perimeter buffers; provision of utilities such as sewage disposal; pedestrian and vehicular circulation; parking;
open space, landscaping and other elements essential to the achievement of adopted community goals. Prior to
the adoption of any SPI Strategy, copies thereof shall be forwarded for review and comment to the appropriate
citizen or township groups and township trustees representing the community within the SPI boundary.
(b) Adoption of Zoning Text and Map Amendment. The Board of Township Trustees, pursuant to procedures
for zoning amendments in Chapter 16, shall approve, deny or modify such standards and boundary
recommended in the SPI strategy and incorporates same in the resolution establishing any specific SPI
district as a supplement to this Chapter. In the SPI District the adopted specific standards shall serve as
supplemental requirements to the regulations of the underlying district in reviewing all requests for zoning
certificates within the Overlay District boundary.
8-1.8 Supplemental SPI District Regulations
SPI district standards adopted by the Board of Township Trustees may relax or further restrict the
underlying zoning districts regulations for land use, lot area, coverage, density, floor area, setback, parking,
height, fencing, landscaping or other specific development standards for specific SPI districts upon finding
that conditions peculiar to such district and the achievement of adopted community plans require
supplemental regulations. Any such supplemental regulations shall be set forth in the resolution
establishing such SPI district or in an amendment thereto.
8-1.9 Classification
SPI districts shall be classified by categories, according to the provisions and qualifications as described
herein, and each adopted SPI district shall be shown on the official Zoning Map. The four categories of
SPI overlay districts include:
(a) Natural Resource (SPI-NR)
(b) Neighborhood Quality (SPI-NQ)
(c) Suburban Center / Corridor (SPI-SC)
(d) Suburban Village (SPI-SV)
8-2 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-NATURAL RESOURCE DISTRICTS
Special Public Interest (SPI) Natural Resource Districts shall be identified as SPI-NR Overlay Districts.
8-2.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose
Natural resources are an important component of quality of life for all residents in the Township. When
irreplaceable natural features are threatened, their preservation should be weighed and evaluated in relation
to public and private interests.
(a) The existence of a 20 percent slope, in combination with Miami town Shale or Kope geologic formation, is
evidence of a condition of natural critical stability, and development under conventional regulations may
precipitate landslides or excessive soil erosion. Additional regulations are needed to preserve the prominent
views from the top or from the slopes of the hillside and the natural contours thereof.
(b) Hillsides, as community separators or boundaries, are historic aids to the identification of residential
communities which help citizens to relate to their communities and to relate the social organizations of
communities to their physical environments.
(c) The location of natural resources often coincides with prime development sites. Long term benefits of
conserving natural resources in a metropolitan area can be achieved through innovative development
regulations based on comprehensive plans.
8-2.2 Characteristics
SPI-NR districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in a SPI-Natural Resource Protection
Strategy (as defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and
containing one or more of the following characteristics:
(a) Lakes, rivers, floodplains, wetlands, mineral deposits, aquifers, forests, parks, or hillsides (20% slope or
greater) or other natural features of significant public interest;
(b) Existence of Miami town Shale or Kope geologic formations, or soils classified as having severe constraints
for development;
(c) Prominent hillsides and natural resources which are readily viewable from a public thoroughfare;
(d) Scenic areas providing views of a major stream or valley or other natural resource;
(e) Hillsides and other natural features functioning as community separators or community boundaries;
(f) Hillsides which support a substantial natural wooded cover.
8-2.3 Designation
The SPI-Natural Resource Districts which meet the characteristics contained in Section 8-2.2 are listed
below and are illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted specific standards for each Natural
Resource District listed below are included in this Zoning Resolution as a supplement to Chapter 8.
8-3 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST - NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY DISTRICTS
Special Public Interest (SPI) Neighborhood Quality Districts shall be identified as SPI-NQ Overlay Districts.
8-3.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose
Balancing the benefits of growth and development of institutions and neighborhood support services with
the livability of adjacent residential neighborhoods requires protection over and above the protection
provided by conventional zoning regulations as follows:
(a) To support convenience to services and quality of environment by providing sufficient land for public and
private services and educational and research institutions;
(b) To promote the orderly growth and expansion of such institutions and support services located in residential
neighborhoods;
(c) To require the development and maintenance of buffer yards on institutional and other nonresidential
properties to protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from the noise, glare and congestion associated
with the intensity of diverse land uses;
(d) To promote compatibility between nonresidential uses and surrounding residential uses, and
(e) To plan for unusual intensity or density of development.
8-3.2 Characteristics
SPI-NQ districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in an SPI-Neighborhood Quality Strategy (as
defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and which contain or
are planned to contain all of the following characteristics:
(a) Land uses including or adjacent to neighborhood retail and support services (for example hospitals, clinics,
educational facilities, and research facilities) or other institutional uses;
(b) Close proximity of diverse land uses to a residential neighborhood.
8-3.3 Designation
The SPI-Neighborhood Quality Districts which meet the characteristics contained in Section 8-2.2 are
listed below and are illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted specific standards for each
Neighborhood Quality District listed below are included in this Zoning Resolution as a supplement to
Chapter 8.
8-4 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-SUBURBAN CENTER/CORRIDOR DISTRICTS
Special Public Interest (SPI) Suburban Center or Suburban Corridor Districts shall be identified as SPI-SC Overlay
Districts.
8-4.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose
Business districts and corridors are recognized as principal focal points of community activity providing an
economic resource and a center for community orientation. It is in the interest of the Township to protect
and enhance the features of public interest in such business districts by:
(a) Preventing the deterioration of property and the extension of blighting conditions;
(b) Encouraging and protecting private investment which improves and stimulates the economic vitality and
social character of the area;
(c) Preventing the creation of influences adverse to the physical character of the area.
8-4.2 Characteristics
SPI-SC districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in a SPI-Suburban Center or SPI-Suburban
Corridor Strategy (as defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
and which contain or are planned to contain the following characteristics:
(a) A concentration of retail and service oriented commercial establishments serving as a principal business
activity center for a sociogeographic neighborhood, community, or region;
(b) An area that has received or been approved for substantial public investment.
(c) An area that is planned for unusual intensity or density of development.
8-4.3 Designation
The SPI-Suburban Center Districts and Suburban Corridor District which meet the characteristics
contained in Section 8-2.2 are listed below and are illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted
specific standards for each Suburban Center/Corridor District listed below are included in this Zoning
Resolution as a supplement to Chapter 8.
8-4.3.1 Special Public Interest District – Suburban Center/Corridor
Kenwood/Montgomery Road Corridor Overlay
8-4.3.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of the SPI-SC Kenwood/Montgomery Road Corridor Overlay is to establish
and maintain areas of economic resources and centers for community
orientation. It is in the interest of the Township to protect and enhance the
features of public interest in such business districts by:
A. Preventing the deterioration of property and the extension of blighting
conditions;
B. Encouraging and protecting private investment which improves and stimulates
the economic vitality and social character of the area; and
C. Preventing the creation of influences adverse to the physical character of the
area.
Unless otherwise identified in the Sections below, the underlying zoning district regulations shall
remain in full force.
8-4.3.2 Permitted Uses
Permitted uses within this overlay district shall be as follows and as further identified in Table 3-2
– Table of Permissible Uses:
A. Office
B. Retail Shopping – Greater than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area
C. Public Service Uses
D. Recreation, Community Facility – Public
E. PUD-2; any use listed above; I.S.R. above .50
8-4.3.3 Accessory Uses
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in this overlay district subject to the provisions of
Chapter 10 and Section 8-4.3.5.
8-4.3.4 Other Uses
Other uses within this overlay district shall be permitted as follows and as further identified in
Table 3-2 – Table of Permitted Uses, Chapter 17, and Chapter 18. Uses not listed in this table or
in Section 8-4.3.2 are not permitted in the Montgomery Road / Kenwood Road corridor overlay
district.
A. Institutional Uses (Conditional Use)
B. Churches (Conditional Use)
C. Mixed Use; Retail Shopping / Office and or Residential (PUD 2)
D. Retail - Shopping – Less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area. (PUD 2)
E. Retail - Commercial Entertainment Facility (PUD 2)
F. Retail – Personal Services (PUD 2)
G. Restaurant – Without Drive Thru or Drive up service (PUD 2)
H. Gasoline Service Station / Convenience Mart (PUD 2)
I. Nursing and Convalescent Home (Conditional Use)
8-4.3.5 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements for the Kenwood/
Montgomery Road Corridor Overlay
Requirement
A. Maximum Height
1. Principal Building Height (ft.) 40
2. Accessory Structure Height (ft.) 20
B. Lot Requirements
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 20,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 100
C. Minimum Yard Requirements
1. Front Yard (ft.) 40
2. Side Yards (ft. each) 20
3. Rear Yard 20
D. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (unless
otherwise identified in Section 8-4.3.4)
.50
8-4.3.6 Vehicular Use Areas
Except as otherwise identified in the specific regulations below, vehicular use areas shall be
regulated as established in Chapter 12.
(a) Location of Required Parking Spaces
Off-street parking areas may be located in the front yard setback. However, the
off-street parking area shall not encroach into any streetscape buffer or be any closer than
ten feet (10’) to the public right of way.
(b) Joint and Shared Parking
Joint and shared parking is encouraged in the Kenwood/ Montgomery Road Corridor
Overlay District. Off-Street Parking Requirements for individual uses may be reduced
by up to twenty percent (20%), per parcel, for joint and shared parking arrangements. A
recorded agreement from the owner, or between owners involved, and all future owners
or assigns, shall be submitted with the required parking plan as identified in Section 12-2.
(c) Access to Off-Street Parking
No off-street parking area shall be so designed that parking spaces are accessed directly
from the street or right-of-way.
(d) Parking for Residential Dwelling Conversions
Parking for residential dwellings that have been converted into a non-residential use shall
locate parking to the rear of the property, using the existing driveway as access to the
spaces.
8-4.3.7 Signs
Except as otherwise identified in this chapter, signs shall be regulated as established in Chapter
13.
8-4.3.8 Building Materials and Design Standards
A. Rooflines
Buildings incorporating flat roofs shall provide architectural features to break up the flat line
created by the roof.
B. Materials and Architectural Treatment
1. The use of reflective metals and painted/unpainted cinderblock shall be prohibited for
any façade of a building or structure that can be seen from the public right-of-way. Brick
and natural stone are the preferred material.
2. All walls that are visible from the public right-of-way shall include windows, doors or
other architectural features to prevent blank walls on any story of the structure.
C. Orientation
1. Buildings erected at the corner of a street intersection shall provide a primary entrance
that is visible from both streets.
2. The front wall of the principal structure shall be parallel to Montgomery, Kenwood or
Galbraith Road.
8-4.3.9 Vehicular Use Areas
The interior landscaping and streetscape buffering of vehicular use areas shall be regulated as
established in Chapter 12 and 14 of this Zoning Resolution.
8-4.3.10 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection
Buffering is required between adjoining parcels, subject to the provisions of Chapter 14 of this
Resolution.
8-4.3.11 Definitions
Retail - Shopping
Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Does not
include adult entertainment or sexually oriented businesses.
Retail - Commercial Entertainment Facility
A facility for any profit-making activity which is generally related to the entertainment field, such
as motion picture theaters, carnivals, amusement parks, bowling alleys, race tracks, miniature
golf, video game rooms and similar entertainment activities. Commercial Entertainment Facilities
do not include adult entertainment or sexually oriented businesses.
Retail - Personal Services
Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers services to the general public such as a
health club, fitness facility, shoe repair, watch repair, barber shop, beauty parlor, dry cleaner and
similar activities but excluding sexually oriented business and other adult entertainment services.
8-5 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-SUBURBAN VILLAGE DISTRICTS
Special Public Interest (SPI) Suburban Village Districts shall be designated SPI-SV Overlay Districts.
8-5.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose
The development and conservation of village and hamlet character within an expanding metropolitan area
requires protection over and above the protection provided by conventional zoning regulations as follows:
(a) To bring many of the activities of daily living, including dwellings, shopping and working within walking
distance;
(b) To minimize traffic congestion by reducing the number and length of automobile trips;
(c) To limit the need for road construction and encourage public transit by organizing appropriate building
densities;
(d) To create a sense of place by providing public spaces and squares;
(e) To integrate economic class and age groups into an authentic community by providing a wide range of
housing types and workplaces; and
(f) To enable and protect quality village ambiance through proper balance of concentration, complexity and
continuity.
8-5.2 Characteristics
SPI-SV districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in an SPI-Suburban Village Development
Strategy (as defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and which
contain or are planned to contain all of the following characteristics:
(a) The Village is physically understood and limited in size.
(b) A diversity of uses, such as residences, shops, workplaces, and public buildings are located in the Village, all
in close proximity.
(c) A hierarchy of streets serve the needs of the pedestrian and the automobile equitably.
(d) Physically defined squares and parks provide places for informal social activity and recreation.
(e) Private buildings form a clear edge, delineating the public street space and the block interior.
(f) Public buildings and squares reinforce the identity of the neighborhood, becoming symbols of community
identity and providing places of purposeful assembly for social, cultural and religious activities.
8-5.3 Designation
The SPI-Suburban Village Districts which meet the characteristics contained in Section 8-2.2 are listed
below and are illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted specific standards for each Suburban
Village District listed below are included in this Zoning Resolution as a supplement to Chapter 8.
8-6 DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZATION
8-6.1 Applications; Contents
Applications for zoning certificates in SPI districts shall be made to the Zoning Administrator pursuant to
Chapter 20. Said applications shall be made on such form or forms as may be provided. The information
required for submission shall demonstrate the compliance of the proposed improvement, construction or
development with the specific standards for the SPI district as well as all requirements of the underlying
district not in conflict with the SPI standards.
8-6.2 Modification Procedure
Any supplemental regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter may be modified as provided in Section 8-
6.3 after public hearing upon a finding by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission that the
modifications will result in public benefit through substantial improvements related to any of the following
conditions:
(a) Provision will be made for substantial usable open space where the slope does not exceed 10 percent for the
use of the occupants of the area;
(b) Usable open space will be created for the public by the dedication of public areas or space;
(c) The restoration of plant materials will be accomplished by the planting of trees, shrubs, and ground covers;
(d) Utility and other service distribution lines will be placed underground;
(e) An improvement in public safety will result;
(f) An improvement in energy conservation will result;
(g) The use of creative site planning and design in order to provide for efficient use of land and an improved
environment will result.
8-6.3 Modification Limits
Upon having made the findings set forth in Section 8-6.2 the regulations set forth therein may be modified
by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission up to the following limits:
(a) The gross dwelling unit density and floor area limitations of any area proposed for development shall remain
unchanged and conform to the basic overall density and floor area limitations of the supplemental regulations
in the SPI District. However, lot dimensions, building height, building setbacks, parking requirements, front,
side, and rear yard requirements or other specific development standards may be modified to provide for a
more functional and desirable use of the property.
(b) Height limitations may be removed, provided such additional stories to dwelling structures shall not:
(1) Increase gross dwelling unit densities or floor area as set forth in the approved development plan;
(2) Such heights shall result in appropriate reduction in building coverage and adherence to the objectives
set forth in this chapter; and
(3) Such heights shall not adversely affect surrounding structures.
(4) Accessory Uses And Structures
CHAPTER 9
NON-CONFORMATIES
9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-1.1 Purpose
This Chapter regulates the continued existence of uses, structures and lots lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this Resolution that do not conform to the regulations of this Resolution applicable in the
zoning districts in which such uses, structures and lots are located. The continued existence of
nonconforming uses is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which such regulations are
established. Thus their gradual elimination is generally desirable. The regulations of this Chapter generally
permit such nonconformities to continue without specific limitation of time but are generally intended to
restrict further investments in such uses that would make them more permanent or less desirable. The
regulations also restrict further investment in noncomplying structures and lots of record that would
increase the degree of noncompliance.
This Chapter recognizes, through provisions for compatible nonconforming uses, that the improvement of
a nonconforming use may be desirable in unique circumstances to achieve additional protection of adjacent
property and benefit the surrounding neighborhood.
This Chapter also recognizes that new standards for landscape, buffers, height and setback requirements
may conflict with the investment backed expectations of owners of developments that existed prior to the
adoption of these regulations and therefore allows limited exception from such regulations to minimize the
affect of these standards on existing property rights.
9-1.2 General Scope of Regulations
These regulations apply to the following categories of nonconformities:
(a) Nonconforming uses of land and of complying structures;
(b) Noncomplying structures;
(c) Noncomplying lots of record;
(d) Compatible nonconforming uses.
Development that was approved as-of-right prior to the effective date of this Resolution and only
permissible as a PUD or Conditional Use by this Resolution shall not be classified as a nonconforming use.
9-1.3 Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a
nonconforming structure in accordance with an order of a public official charged with protecting the public
safety who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition. This is
provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Chapter prohibiting
the repair or restoration of partial structures or signs.
9-1.4 Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures
No use, structure or sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after
such principal use or structure has been voluntarily discontinued for two (2) years or more, unless it shall
thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
9-1.5 Burden of Establishing Legality of Nonconformity
The burden of establishing that any nonconforming use lawfully exists under the provisions of this
Resolution shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the Township.
9-1.6 Inventory and Notice of Nonconforming Uses
Within two (2) years after the effective date of this Resolution, or any amendment thereto creating new
nonconformities, or such longer period as may be required, the Zoning Inspector shall inventory all
nonconforming uses and determine the names and addresses of the owners of record thereof. For each
such nonconformity inventoried, the Zoning Inspector shall determine the nature and extent of the
nonconformity.
Upon making such determination, the Zoning Inspector shall notify the aforesaid owner or lessee in writing
by registered mail of his determination. Such inventory and notices shall be kept on file by the Zoning
Inspector and shall be a matter of public record.
The determinations of the Zoning Inspector made pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Chapter 22 in the same manner as other rulings and interpretations.
This Section does not relieve the burden establishing the legality of the nonconforming use from the
property owner. It also does not relinquish the establishment of a nonconforming use if the inventory is
not performed or completed.
9-1.7 Zoning Certificate for Legal Nonconformity
The owner of any nonconforming use may at any time apply to the Zoning Inspector for a Nonconforming
Use Zoning Certificate to establish the legality of such nonconformity as of a specified date.
Such application shall be filed and processed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.
Any person receiving a notice pursuant to Section 9-1.6 above shall be required, within sixty (60) days of
the receipt of such notice, to apply to the Zoning Inspector for a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate
with respect to the identified nonconformity. Unless an appeal from the determination of the Zoning
Inspector has been filed, such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit acknowledging the Zoning
Inspector's determination. This affidavit shall be kept on file by the Zoning Inspector and shall be a matter
of public record.
If, upon reviewing an application for a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate for a nonconformity, the
Zoning Inspector determines that the use in question was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of
the provision creating the nonconformity in question, and remains lawful existing subject only to such
nonconformity at the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, the Zoning
Inspector shall issue a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate evidencing such facts and setting forth the
nature and extent of the nonconformity. Otherwise, the Zoning Inspector shall decline to issue such
certificate and shall declare such use of land or structure to be in violation of this Resolution.
9-2 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
9-2.1 Authority to Continue
Any lawfully existing use of land or of any structure which becomes nonconforming through an
amendment of this Resolution or the Zoning Map, may be continued. So long as no structural alterations
are made, it may be changed to another nonconforming use or a more restricted use permitted as-of-right in
the zoning district in which it is located.
9-2.2 Nonconforming Use Discontinued
If a lawfully existing nonconforming use of land or of any structure is voluntarily discontinued for two (2)
years or more, any future use shall conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located, unless approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals according to the provisions of Section 9-5.
9-2.3 Ordinary Repair and Maintenance of Structures
Normal maintenance and incidental repair, replacement and installation or relocation of non-bearing walls,
non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any structure that is devoted in
whole or in part to a nonconforming use or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land.
9-2.4 Structural Alteration
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Section 9-5, no structure that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use, or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land, shall be
structurally altered unless the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or
other nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other
nonconformity of such structure.
9-2.5 Enlargement of Structure
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Section 9-5, no structure that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land, shall be
enlarged or added to in any manner, including the interior addition for floor area, unless the use of such
structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Except as
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals, no such enlargement shall create any new parking, loading,
bulk, yard, space or other nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk,
yard, space or other nonconformity of such structure.
9-2.6 Extension of Use Prohibited
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Section 9-5, a nonconforming use of
land or of a structure shall not be extended. Such prohibited activity, unless otherwise authorized by the
Board, shall include:
(a) An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any structure or land area other than that occupied
by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Resolution or any amendment thereto that causes
such use to become nonconforming;
(b) An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a building or other structure to any portion of
the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Resolution or
any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
(c) An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective
date of this Resolution, or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming.
9-2.7 Moving
No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any
other location on the same or any other lot, unless such use shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land, and is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be moved in
whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located after being so moved.
9-2.8 Damage or Destruction
If a structure, housing a nonconforming use, is completely destroyed, by any means, the structure shall not
be restored and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed without authorization by the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to Section 9-5 by the grant of a Zoning Certificate following a public hearing.
The restored nonconforming use shall be accomplished without increasing the degree of any parking,
loading, bulk, yard, space or other nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction.
9-3 NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES
9-3.1 Authority to Continue
Any noncomplying structure that is devoted to a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this Chapter.
9-3.2 Repair, Maintenance, and Alterations
Any noncomplying structure may be repaired, maintained or altered (including expansion); provided,
however, that any such repair, maintenance or alteration shall not create any new nonconformity nor
increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure.
9-3.3 Moving
No noncomplying structure shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other
location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
9-3.4 Damage or Destruction
Any noncomplying structure that is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the
owner, thereof, to the extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of replacement of such structure
new shall not be restored unless its restoration has been authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals
pursuant to Section 9-5 by the grant of a Zoning Certificate following a public hearing. However, no
repairs or restorations shall be made unless restoration pursuant to the Zoning Certificate is actually begun
within one (1) year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to
completion. The determination of the extent of damage or destruction under this Section 9-3.4
shall be based on the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition before the damage
or destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior to the damage or
destruction. The estimate for this purpose shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.
This Section 9-3.4 shall not apply to any residential dwellings, to any structures accessory to such
dwellings, nor to any signs as provided in Section 13-4.3.
9-4 NONCOMPLYING LOTS OF RECORD
9-4.1 Authority to Utilize for Dwellings
In any district in which dwellings are a permitted use, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any
other provisions of this Resolution, a dwelling of the type permitted in the district in which the lot is
located and that complies with the restrictions of Section 9-4.2 may be erected on a legal nonconforming
lot.
9-4.2 Regulations for Single Family Use of Noncomplying Lots
Any lot of record on the initial effective date of this Resolution may be used for any single family dwelling
when such use is permitted in the district, irrespective of the width or area of said lot; the width of the side
yard of any such lot need not exceed ten (10%) percent of the width of the lot; the depth of the rear yard of
any such lot need not exceed twenty (20%) percent of the depth of the lot, provided, however, that in no
instance shall the minimum dimensions of the side and rear yards be less than three (3) feet and ten (10)
feet respectively. Accessory structure yards shall be as required by the district regulations.
9-4.3 Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots
In any district in which dwellings are not permitted as-of-right, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be
used for any use permissible in the district in which it is located if, but only if, the development of such lot
meets all requirements of the district in which it is located, including impervious surface ratio and yard
requirements, except lot area, width and depth requirements.
9-5 COMPATIBLE NONCONFORMING USES
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions to the contrary, the usable area of a nonconforming use may be
increased or improved where the owner of such use can demonstrate through application to the Board of
Zoning Appeals that the manner in which the usable area of the nonconforming use will be increased or
improved will have no adverse impact upon adjacent property owners and other permitted land uses in the
surrounding neighborhood or can be made compatible with the adjacent property owners and the uses in
the surrounding neighborhood upon compliance with specified conditions.
9-5.1 Application
The owner shall submit a development plan application to the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) on a form
provided by the Planning & Zoning Department pursuant to the hearing procedures of Section 22-4.
The application shall address site plan features and considerations, including but not limited to:
(a) The location and size of the property including setbacks and lot dimensions;
(b) The use of the property on the effective date of this Resolution;
(c) All uses adjacent to the property and within the surrounding neighborhood;
(d) All existing structures, yards, utility easements, rights-of-way, floodplains and wooded areas on and adjacent
to the property;
(e) The density (in terms of dwelling units per acre) and the intensity (in terms of impervious surface ratio or
gross square footage) of the nonconforming use;
(f) Landscaping;
(g) Architectural treatment;
(h) Traffic impact;
(i) The reasons why the nonconforming use is compatible with and will have no adverse impact on the land uses
permitted in the district in which it is located; and
(j) Nature and extent of additional protection from adverse impacts afforded to adjacent property owners.
9-5.2 Review and Decision
On the basis of the completed application and consideration of the elements set forth in Section 9-5.1, the
Zoning Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Board of Zoning Appeals a report that sets forth
findings and recommendations. Upon receipt of the Administrators written report, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall approve or deny the application in accordance with its public hearing procedures as outlined
in Section 22-4. In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards to assure that the nonconformity does not adversely affect orderly development
and the value of nearby property including, but not limited to: required improvement of, or modifications
to existing improvements on, the property; limitations on hours of operations; and limitations on the nature
of operations.
CHAPTER 10
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
10-1 GENERAL AUTHORIZATION
Except as otherwise expressly provided or limited in this Chapter, accessory uses and structures are permitted in any
zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully existing within such district provided such uses and
structures conform to all applicable requirements of this Resolution. Any accessory use or structure may be
approved in conjunction with the approval of the principal use.
10-2 ZONING CERTIFICATES
No accessory use or structure shall be established or constructed unless a Zoning Certificate evidencing compliance
of the proposed use or structure with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable regulations of this
Resolution has first been issued in accordance with Chapter 20 unless otherwise stated below.
A satellite dish antenna that is 36” or less in diameter and is attached to the wall or roof of the main building
(Section 10-6.1) in any district shall be exempt from all zoning regulations and shall not require a zoning certificate.
Other accessory uses not requiring Zoning Certificates but subject to requirements of this chapter include
ornamental landscape structures (Section 10-3.4), swing sets, jungle gyms and other play devices not requiring a
building permit (Section 10-3.5), dumpsters and trash handling areas (Section 10-5) handicap ramps attached the
main structure (Section 3-5.7) and automobile rentals (Section 10-10).
10-3 USE LIMITATIONS
In addition to the applicable use limitations of the district in which it is located, no accessory use or structure shall
be permitted unless it complies with the following restrictions:
10-3.1 Principal Structure Permit Required
No accessory use or structure shall be approved, established or constructed before the principal use is
approved in accordance with these regulations. Accessory buildings that are to be used for storage
materials necessary for the construction of the principal structure may be erected upon a lot prior to the
construction of that structure but only after a permit for the principal structure has been issued.
10-3.2 Signs Prohibited
No sign, except as expressly authorized by this Chapter, Chapter 13, or Chapter 17 shall be maintained in
connection with an accessory use or structure.
10-3.3 Location
No accessory use or structure shall be located in the front or side yard and the total combined area of all
accessory structures shall not occupy more than thirty five (35%) percent of the required area of the rear
yard. Where the principal structure is at least two hundred (200) feet from the right-of-way, an accessory
structure may then be located within the front or side yard but must be at least one hundred (100) feet from
the right-of-way, and all district setback requirements shall be maintained. In the case of panhandle lots,
the area of the panhandle cannot be used for calculating the lot area or be counted towards setback from the
right-of-way line or edge of easement. All accessory structures must be setback at least six (6) feet from
all other structures and at least three (3) feet from all other property lines.
10-3.4 Decorative Features in Front and Side Yards
Ornamental landscape structures such as fountains, ponds, and other decorative features do not require
zoning certificate approval and shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the front or side yard area
and shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
10-3.5 Play Devices in Rear Yards
Swing sets, jungle gyms, trampolines, and other play or recreational devices excluding those accessory
uses specified in Section 10-13 shall be located in the rear yard and must maintain a minimum setback of
three (3) feet from every property line.
10-4 HOME OCCUPATIONS
A home occupation shall be permitted in any zoning district as an accessory use to any permitted dwelling unit in
accordance with the following standards.
10-4.1 General Standards
(a) Maximum Area. The home occupation shall be conducted only within the closed living area of the
dwelling unit or existing accessory structure, and shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling unit;
(b) Use of Accessory Structures. If the home occupation is conducted within an existing accessory
structure, then that structure shall also serve as the garage or storage structure for the residents of the
dwelling unit;
(c) Outside Appearance. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling unit or
accessory structure, or other visible evidence of the home occupation other than one sign not
exceeding (2) two square feet in area, non-illuminated which shall be mounted flat against the wall of
the structure.
(d) Commodity and Stock Prohibited. No commodity or stock in trade shall be sold, displayed or stored
outside or inside the premises;
(e) Nuisance Prohibited. The home occupation shall not utilize mechanical, electrical, or other equipment
which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, causes fluctuation in line voltage, vibration,
heat, glare or other nuisances outside the dwelling unit or accessory structure in which it is located.
(f) Employees Prohibited. No persons shall be employed other than members of the immediate family
residing on the premises.
(g) Additional Traffic Generation Prohibited. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
(h) Essential Residential Character. The permission for home occupations as provided herein is intended
to secure flexibility in the application of the requirements of this Resolution, but such permission is
not intended to allow the essential residential character of residential districts, in terms of use and
appearance to be changed by the occurrence of non-residential activities.
10-4.2 Uses Prohibited as Home Occupations
Home occupations shall not, under any circumstance, be deemed to include the following activities nor any
other activities similar in kind or intensity of use: nursing homes; funeral homes, mortuaries and
embalming establishments; restaurants; bed and breakfast establishments; clinics, hospitals or the general
practice of medicine or dentistry; clubs, including fraternities and sororities; instruction of persons; day
care centers or type A day care home; retail or wholesale business; warehousing; beauty shop; barbershop;
tailoring shops; shoe or hat repair; drop-off or pick-up station; and on-premise consultation, sales or
transaction.
10-5 DUMPSTERS AND TRASH HANDLING AREAS FOR COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS
The following requirements shall apply to all dumpsters, trash handling areas, and related service entrances:
10-5.1 Setbacks
Dumpsters, trash handling areas and related screening, shall be located in compliance with the same
minimum setbacks as a main building as determined by the zone district in which such structure is
constructed.
10-5.2 Location of Screen
Any such accessory use or structure shall be screened on three sides by a wall from the view from public
streets and any abutting properties located in a residential, office, or commercial district.
10-5.3 Height and Construction of Screen
Any fence or wall required under this Section shall have a height no greater than seven (7) feet and no less
than five (5) feet. Any wall shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry
materials. The access entrance shall be constructed in a durable fashion of wood posts and/or planks with
minimum diameter or width of three (3) inches and with no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
fence surface left open between posts and/or planks.
10-5.4 Pick Up Times
Dumpsters and related trash handling areas shall be restricted to pick up times between 7:00 AM and
9:00 PM.
10-6 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
A satellite dish antenna, as defined in Chapter 2, restricted to the sole purpose of receiving and amplifying
microwave signals, for television reception shall be permitted in all Districts subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
10-6.0 Applicability
The following categories of satellite dish antennas shall be exempt from all zoning requirements and shall
not require a zoning certificate:
(a) An earth station (ground-mounted) antenna that is two meters (78.74 inches) or less in
diameter and located or proposed to be located in a commercial or industrial zoning district.
(b) An earth station (ground-mounted) antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter
and located in any zoning district.
(c) A satellite dish antenna that is 36” or less in diameter and is attached to the wall or roof of the
main building (Section 10-6.1) in any district.
10-6.1 Site Plan
A plan for a wall or roof mounted satellite dish or a ground mounted satellite dish antenna that is not
exempted under 10-6.0 shall be submitted to the Administrative Official indicating the proposed height,
diameter, location, setbacks. Foundation details, landscaping, and screening shall also be required in the
case of a ground mounted satellite dish antenna.
10-6.2 Standards
(a) Approval of a wall or roof mounted satellite antenna, over 36 inches in diameter and attached to the main
building shall be subject to the following standards.
(1) Location. In all zone districts wall or roof mounted satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on the
front elevation of the building.
(2) Setbacks. In all zone Districts wall or roof mounted satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted to
project into any required side or rear yard area.
(b) Approval of a ground mounted satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) Location.
? In the AA, A, A-2, B, B-2, and C Districts satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear of the
property beyond the rear building line.
? In all other zone Districts, ground mounted satellite dish antennas shall also be permitted in the
interior side yard.
(2) Setbacks. Ground mounted satellite dish antennas shall provide the following minimum setbacks:
? Rear Yard and Side Yard. In all zone Districts, fifteen feet (15').
? Front Yard. In no case shall a ground mounted satellite dish antenna be located closer to the front
or side street of a lot or building site than the main or principal building unless otherwise authorized
by Section 10-3.3.
? Setback from Power Lines. Satellite dish antennas, or any appurtenances thereto, shall be located
at least eight feet (8') from any power line over two hundred-fifty (250) volts.
(3) Landscaping. Ground-mounted antennas shall be screened from ground view from the street and
adjacent property owners by landscaping as shall be approved by the Administrative Official. In order
to reduce the height of the required plant material, berms may be employed in conjunction with the
landscaping plan.
(4) Diameter. The diameter of such antenna shall not exceed the following:
? In the A-A, A, A-2, B, B-2, and C Districts, ten feet (10').
? In the all other Districts, twelve feet (12').
(5) Height. Ground-mounted antennas shall be limited to a maximum height of twelve feet (12') above
grade in the A-A, A, A-2, B, B-2, and C Districts, and a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') above
grade in all other Districts.
(6) Ground Coverage. The ground coverage of satellite dish antennas shall be counted in computing the
ground coverage for auxiliary and accessory use structures located upon the building site.
(7) Number Permitted. Only one satellite dish antenna shall be allowed for each principal building.
(8) Installation. The installation or modification of a satellite dish antenna shall be in accordance with all
applicable construction and safety codes and procedures and shall meet the requirements of the
Hamilton County Building Code.
(9) Maintenance. Satellite dish antennas, appurtenances, landscaping, and screening shall be kept and
maintained in good condition.
10-7 FENCES AND WALLS
The restrictions set forth below shall apply to all fences and walls located in all districts, except for fences and walls
surrounding public utility structures or radio, television, or microwave transmission or relay towers.
Also see Section 14-6 and Section 15-2.2 for additional fence and wall standards.
10-7.1 Height and Open Face Area in Front and Side Yard
No fence or wall shall be located in any defined front yard. A fence located in the defined side yard shall
be built to a height greater than three (3’) feet and shall have an open face area of no less that 50 percent or
when constructed to a height of not more than four feet (4') above grade, shall have an open face area of no
less than 75 percent. Fences and walls as provided in Sections 10-5.3 and 10-7.4 shall be exempt from
these height and openness requirements.
10-7.2 Height in Rear Yard
No fence or wall located in the rear yard shall be built to a height greater than six feet (6') above grade.
Fences and walls as provided in Sections 10-5.3 and 10-7.4 shall be exempt from these height
requirements. Such fences or walls may be solid in construction.
10-7.3 Entrance Walls in Front Yard
An entrance wall or one set of entrance walls constructed on opposite sides of the entrance street or drive
shall be allowed in a front yard in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) It is part of a single-family development containing at least ten (10) dwelling units or a multi-family,
commercial or industrial development having a minimum of 500 ft. of lot frontage.
(b) It is constructed at a maximum height of six (6) feet above grade and does not extend into the sight distance
triangle (See Figure 14-D).
(c) Signage on such entrance wall shall be subject to size and illumination standards contained in Chapter 13.
10-7.4 Retaining Walls
Retaining walls in a residential district shall be setback from the residential property line a minimum of two
(2) foot for every foot of height.
10-7.5 Electric Fences
Electric fences are prohibited in Sycamore Township, unless the lot of record is more than five (5) acres
and the fence is being used for agricultural purposes.
10-8 DAY CARE CENTERS AS AN ACCESSORY TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USE
A day care center receiving state certification pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code shall be permitted as accessory to
any non-residential use in accordance with the following requirements:
10-8.1 Area of Outdoor Play Space
At least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be provided on the lot,
exclusive of driveways, off-street parking and service areas, and required yards.
10-8.2 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space
All outdoor play space shall be located in the rear yard and fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides to a
height of no less than three feet (3') and no greater than six feet (6').
10-8.3 Parking Standards
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-9 DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE WINDOWS
A drive-in service window, ATM (automatic teller machine), photo drop off, pharmacy, restaurant or other similar
type facility shall be permitted only as an accessory use in the O and E districts (except as provided in Section 1-7),
in accordance with the following requirements:
10-9.1 Principal Use
The principal use shall be a retail establishment, office, or restaurant located on the same lot.
10-9.2 Setbacks
Any freestanding drive-in service window shall be located in compliance with the same minimum setbacks
as a main building as determined by the zone district in which such structure is constructed.
10-9.3 Circulation and Stacking Space
The amount of stacking space and circulation patterns on the lot shall be at least five (5) spaces per
window lane, calculated from the first customer contact point, and shall be adequate to keep traffic from
backing up into the street.
10-9.4 Parking Standards
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-10 AUTOMOBILE RENTAL
Automobile rental shall be permitted as an accessory use only where the principal use is an airport, retail automobile
dealership, tool rental or hotel or motel. Where the principal use is a hotel or motel, automobile rental shall be
permitted as an accessory use only in accordance with the following requirements:
10-10.1 Signs
No sign advertising the rental of automobiles shall be located outside the hotel or motel building; and
10-10.2 Parking
No more than ten (10) automobiles that are not currently leased to customers shall be parked on the same
property as the hotel or motel.
10-10.3 Parking Standards
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-11 HELIPORTS
A heliport shall be permitted as an accessory use only in any non-residential district provided it complies with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations and guidelines.
10-12 DETACHED GARAGE, STORAGE STRUCTURES AND OTHER DETACHED
STRUCTURES.
Detached private garages, storage barns, and other detached structures shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
Residential districts or any district with permitted residential uses, in accordance with the following requirements:
10-12.1 Area and Height
No more than 1,032 square feet in area and 12.5 feet in height measured to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs (Reference Appendix 1).
10-12.2 Setback
No detached structure shall be closer than three (3) feet from any property line.
10-12.3 Location
No detached structure shall be located in the front or side yard except as otherwise stipulated in Sections
10-3.1 and 10-3.3.
10-13 ACTIVE RECREATION AREAS
Swimming pools (measured from the edge of water), tennis courts and independent basketball courts and similar
active recreation areas shall be permitted as an accessory use in all Residential districts or any district with permitted
residential uses provided they are located behind the rear line of the principal structure and at least ten (10) feet
from all property lines. Fixed lighting for these uses shall be located, screened, or shielded so that any adjacent
residential lots are not directly illuminated.
10-14 PRE-SCHOOL AND ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
10-14.1 Building Location
All buildings shall be setback from any property line the minimum distance that is required in the district in
which it is located. An additional two (2) feet shall be added to the setback requirement for each foot of
building height which exceeds the maximum height permitted (not to exceed 45 feet in height).
10-14.2 Building Type
All accessory structures shall be designed to reflect the main building and the use of temporary, portable or
modular structures shall be prohibited.
10-14.3 Area of Outdoor Play Space
At least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be provided on the lot,
exclusive of driveways, off-street parking and service areas and required yards.
10-14.4 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space
All outdoor play space shall be located in the rear yard and fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides to a
height of no less than three (3) feet and no greater than six (6) feet.
10-15 FESTIVALS AND ANY OTHER FUNDRAISERS
10-15.1 Festivals, Bingo or any other Fund Raising Activity
All fund raising activities shall follow the regulations set forth in Chapter 11 Temporary Uses.
10-15.2 Temporary Tents used at Festival and other Fundraiser Activities
All temporary tents used at festivals or other Fundraisers shall be regulated by Chapter 11 Temporary Uses,
specifically 11-4.7 - Tents.
10-15.3 Temporary Signs
All temporary signs shall follow the regulations in Chapter 13 – Signs.
CHAPTER 11
TEMPORARY USES
11-1 AUTHORIZATION
Temporary uses as defined in Chapter 2 and as hereinafter specified are permitted in accordance with the provisions
set forth in this Chapter.
11-2 ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE
AND REVOCATION
11-2.1 Certificate Required
Except as provided in Section 11-4.1, no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a Zoning
Certificate evidencing the compliance of such use with the provisions of this Resolution shall have first
been issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.
11-3 USE LIMITATIONS
11-3.1 General Limitations
Every temporary use shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the district in which it is located as
well as with the limitations made applicable to specified temporary uses by Section 11-4. No temporary
use shall be permitted if it would have significant negative impact on any adjacent property or on the area
as a whole.
11-3.2 Hours and Days of Operation
No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are
designated by the Administrative Official, in the Zoning Certificate required by Section 11-2.
This determination shall be based on the nature of the temporary use and the character of the surrounding
area.
11-3.3 Traffic
No temporary use shall be permitted if the Administrative Official, upon review of the application, finds
that additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects of surrounding streets and uses which cannot be adequately mitigated by the
applicant.
11-3.4 Conflicts with Other Temporary Uses
No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized
temporary use.
11-3.5 Sign Limitations
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations contained in Chapter 13.
11-3.6 Parking
Before approving any temporary use, the Administrative Official shall make an assessment of the total
number of off-street parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed
temporary use. This shall be done on the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the availability of
other parking facilities in the area. The Administrative Official shall approve such temporary use only if
such off-street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of the
Administrative Official, unreasonably reduce the amount of off-street parking spaces available for use in
connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
11-3.7 Additional Conditions
Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply with any other conditions as the Administrative Official
may reasonably impose to achieve the purposes of this Resolution or to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
11-4 PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES
Subject to the specific regulations and time limits that follow, and to the other applicable regulations of the district
in which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses, and no others, are permitted in the zoning districts
herein specified:
11-4.1 House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales
House, apartment, garage, and yard sales are permitted in any Residential District, but only when limited to
the personal possessions of the owner-occupant of the dwelling unit at which such sale is being conducted.
Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days and no more than three (3)
such sales shall be conducted from the same residence in any twelve (12) month period. No zoning
certificate shall be required for such use.
11-4.2 Outdoor Art, Craft and Plant Shows, Exhibits and Sales
Outdoor art, craft and plant shows are permitted in any Office, Retail Business and Light Industrial
Districts; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the
Administrative Official on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access
and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Every such sale shall be limited to a period
not to exceed three (3) days.
11-4.3 Christmas Tree Sales
Christmas tree sales are permitted in any Office, Retail Business or Light Industrial Districts and, when
conducted by a not-for-profit religious, philanthropic or civic group or organization on property owned or
leased by such group or organization, in any Residential district. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed fifty (50) days. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard requirements of this
Resolution, except that no tree shall be displayed so as to obstruct the sight triangles defined in Chapter 14,
Section 14-9.
11-4.4 Contractor's Offices and Equipment Sheds
Contractor's offices and equipment sheds are permitted in any district when accessory to a construction
project. No such use shall contain any sleeping accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.
11-4.5 Model Units, Including Real Estate Offices
Model units including Real Estate offices, are permitted in any district when an accessory use to a new
development. No such use shall contain any sleeping accommodations unless located in a model dwelling
unit. Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in such
development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. No such office
shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm.
11-4.6 Festivals and Circuses
Festivals and circuses are permitted in any district when sponsored by a not-for-profit religious,
philanthropic or civic group or organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization.
Commercial festivals and circuses are permitted in any Office, Retail Business or Light Industrial district;
provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official
on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue
adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
Such use need not comply with the yard requirements of this Resolution except that structures or
equipment that might block the view of operators of motor vehicles on any public or private street and shall
not be located within the sight triangle defined in Chapter 14. Such use need not comply with the
maximum height requirements of this Resolution. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any
such carnival or circus shall submit in advance of the event date a site layout displaying adequate ingress
and egress routes for emergency vehicles and no dead-end aisles.
In the event that a temporary use does not require the approval of the County Building Department the
applicant or concessionaire shall provide written approval of the Township Fire Department.
11-4.7 Tents
Tents are permitted in all districts in connection with any permitted, accessory or temporary use. No tent
shall be allowed to remain for a period of more than five (5) days longer than the use with which it is
associated or, in the absence of any such period, ten (10) days. Unless waived in writing by the
Administrative Official, every tent shall comply with the bulk and yard requirements of the district in
which it is located.
11-4.8 Portable Storage Containers
Residential and Commercial use properties are permitted one (1) portable storage container not to exceed
fourteen (14) consecutive days per calendar year. The container must be situated on a paved surface and
be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way, easement of access, or edge of pavement,
whichever is greater. A portable storage container is intended to provide “temporary” storage for moving
and similar short-term purposes. These units are not permitted as a permanent accessory storage structure,
regardless of the proposed location of the unit. A temporary/accessory use zoning certificate is required
before the container is placed on-site.
11-5 BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
Except as expressly provided otherwise in Section 11-3 above, every temporary use shall comply with the bulk and
yard requirements of the district in which such temporary use is located.
CHAPTER 12
VEHICULAR USE AREAS AND LIGHTING
12-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to prevent or alleviate the congestion of the public street, to minimize any detrimental
effects of vehicular use areas on adjacent properties, to enhance vehicular use areas with landscape elements for
improved traffic circulation and visual amenities and to promote the safety and welfare of the public. To
accomplish this purpose minimum requirements are established, while more landscaping may be included
depending on site specific conditions.
12-2 APPLICABILITY
12-2.1 New and Expanded Uses
The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Chapter shall apply to any application for a permit
for the erection of a new building. For an alteration, addition or change of use of an existing building; or
for an alteration, development or change of land use that requires more parking; or for changes of the
capacity of an existing parking area or parking structure the off-street parking and loading requirements of
this Chapter shall apply only to the area of the alteration, addition or change of use.
12-2.2 Existing Uses
The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to buildings and land uses
legally in existence on the effective date of amendment of this Resolution unless modified in the manner
stated in Section 12-2.1 and further provided that any parking or loading facilities now serving such
buildings or uses shall not in the future be reduced below these requirements.
12-2.3 Maintenance
The duty to provide and maintain all such areas shall be the joint responsibilities of the owner, operator and
lessee of the use for which vehicular use areas are required.
12-2.4 Plan Review
For any off-street parking area required under this Chapter, and for any other proposed parking area for
five (5) or more vehicles, a plan shall be submitted with the application for a Zoning Certificate to the
Administrative Official to review for compliance with these regulations and for any other applicable
regulations. Any such parking plan shall show the number of parking spaces, the arrangement of parking
aisles, the location of driveway entrances, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, the location
or typical location of sidewalks, wheel stops, lighting and curbs on or adjacent to the property, the location
of utilities, barriers, shelters, and signs, the location of landscaped areas and the types and location of
vegetation to be planted in them, typical cross sections of pavement, stormwater drainage facilities, and any
other relevant information requested by the Administrative Official.
12-3 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, off-street parking spaces for each new principal use on a parcel shall
be provided according to the units of measurement indicated for that use in Table 12-9, Schedule of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, found at the end of this Chapter.
12-3.1 Computation of Required Spaces
The following provision shall govern the computation of the number of off-street parking spaces required.
(a) Fractions. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction ½ or less shall be disregarded and any fraction over ½ shall require one (1)
parking space.
(b) Bench Seating Calculation. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which
patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty inches (20") of
such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for offstreet
parking facilities,
(c) Use of Maximum. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of faculty, staff, students or
employees, the maximum number present at any one time shall govern.
(d) Interpretation. For uses not expressly listed in Table 12-9, found at the end of this Chapter, parking spaces
shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most similar listed use as determined by the
Administrative Official and as adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Policy for that
specific use.
12-3.2 Spaces for the Handicapped
Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code.
12-3.3 Shared Parking
For shopping centers, parking requirements may be located on adjoining parcels if the parking
requirements for the entire shopping center are met, the total number of required parking spaces are located
within 300 feet from the uses they are intended to serve, and there is a recorded agreement from the Owner
or between the Owners involved and all future owners or assigns which shall be submitted with the
required plan.
12-4 DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND AISLES
Each required parking space shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements set out in Table 12-4 and illustrated
in Figure 12-4A.
12-4.1 Aisles
Each required parking space shall have direct and unrestricted access to an aisle of the minimum width set
out in Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A.
12-4.2 Access
All parking spaces shall be entered and exited along parking aisles arranged perpendicular to access drives
wherever possible. Parking shall be restricted along the area defined as an “entry drive” entry drives
within thirty feet (30') of the right-of-way or easement line (and at greater distances as may be required by
the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission depending on the traffic generation and parking lot size) nor
within eight feet (8') of the curb or pavement edge of such restricted entry drive area.
Illustration
12-4.3 Maneuverability Areas
In order to promote adequate maneuverability, the following provisions shall be followed:
(a) Turn-Around Area. Where more than three (3) parking spaces are served by a single driveway, a turnaround
area shall be provided, or other provision shall be made, to permit cars to exit the parking lot or
garage without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
(b) Back-Up Area. Each parking space shall be provided with a sufficient back-up area to permit egress in one
maneuver, consisting of one backward and one forward movement.
12-4.4 Handicapped Parking Spaces
The dimension of parking spaces serving handicapped persons shall conform to the requirements of the
Ohio Basic Building Code.
12-4.5 Surface and Drainage
Every off-street parking lot and driveway shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder
pavement providing an all-weather, durable, and dustless surface. Individual stalls shall be graded to drain
so as to dispose of all surface water within the parking area in accordance with the regulations of the
Hamilton County Department of Public Works. No surface water from parking areas shall accumulate or
drain over a public sidewalk. Interior landscaped areas may be used for surface drainage.
12-4.6 Lighting
Fixed lighting shall comply with the provisions contained in Section 12-7 and be so arranged to prevent
direct glare of beams onto any public or private property or street.
TABLE 12-4
PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
A B C D E F
PARKING
ANGLE
STALL
WIDTH
LENGTH
OF STALL
AISLE
WIDTH
WIDTH OF
ACCESS
DRIVE
BAY WIDTH
(CENTER TO CENTER WIDTH
OF TWO ROW BAY WITH
AISLE BETWEEN)
ONE
WAY
TWO
WAY
ONE
WAY
TWO
WAY
0 o 9 ft. 23 ft. 12 ft. 18 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. 30 ft.
30 o - 53 o 9 ft. 18 ft. 13 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 42 ft. 49 ft.
54 o - 75 o 9 ft. 19 ft. 18 ft. 22 ft. 20 ft. 52 ft. 56 ft.
76 o - 90 o 9 ft. 19 ft. 22 ft. 24 ft. 20 ft. 60 ft. 62 ft.
FIGURE 12-4A
PARKING STALL AND AISLE LAYOUT
FIGURE 12-4B
WHEEL STOP PLACEMENT
12-4.7 Wheel Stops and Continuous Curbs
Wheel stops or continuous curbs shall be provided, located, and designed to protect required screening
devices and landscaping and pedestrian ways from damage or encroachment of vehicles and to provide
necessary traffic control in the parking area.
(a) Wheel Stops. Each wheel stop shall be a singular block of reinforced concrete, stone, or other durable
material six inches (6") in height, six inches (6") in width, and eight feet (8') in length. Wheel stops shall be
placed as shown in Figure 12-4B and securely attached to the ground and may be used only at the end of
parking stalls.
(b) Continuous Curbs. Continuous curbs shall be made of asphalt, concrete, or stone, and shall be a minimum of
six inches (6") in height and six inches (6") in width. They shall form a non-interrupted edge around all
landscaped areas adjacent to parking and turn-around areas which are not protected by wheel stops.
(c) Placement. The wheel stop or continuous curb shall be located a minimum of four feet (4') from any
structures, buildings, walls, or plant material, excluding groundcover (as shown in Figure 12-4C) to prevent a
vehicle from driving onto the landscape area or hitting any structure or plant material at the edge of the
parking area. The mature size of the plant material shall be specified to determine if the landscape meets the
setback requirements.
(d) Stall Dimensions. Where continuous curbs are used, the paved area of the parking stall length required in
Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A (Dimension 'C') may be reduced by two and one-half feet (2½') as
shown in Figure 12-4D provided that the vehicle overhang will not encroach on pedestrian circulation or the
required setback for desirable plant growth. Where wheel stops are used, the paved area of the parking stall
length required in Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A (Dimension 'C') shall not be reduced.
12-4.8 Slope
No area of any parking lot, excluding entry drives, shall have a slope in excess of seven percent (7%).
Entry drives or drives that connect parking areas shall not have a slope in excess of ten percent (10%).
FIGURE 12-4C
STRUCTURE AND PLANTING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
4’MINIMUM REQUIRED
FIGURE 12-4D
PAVEMENT AREA ADJUSTMENT WITH CONTINUOUS CURB USAGE
12-5 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
12-5.1 Off-Street Parking
Required off-street parking spaces for any use shall be located on the same parcel as the use they are
intended to serve, except where these regulations allow shared parking between uses on different lots
pursuant to Section 12-3.3.
12-5.2 Residential Parking
In any residential use parcel or residential district, no off-street parking area, maneuvering area for parking
spaces, or loading area shall be located within any required yard. Such vehicles shall only be parked on a
paved surface or in an enclosed garage. This restriction shall not apply to driveways providing access from
the street to the required parking area located outside of the required front yard, nor is it intended to
prohibit parking of vehicles on such drive serving a detached dwelling. Within ten feet (10') of the right-ofway,
the maximum width of the driveway shall be twenty-four feet (24') in a Single-Family District. No
residential parking area or garage, in a residential district or on a parcel being used for residential purposes,
shall be utilized for more than one (1) commercial vehicle owned or normally operated by a resident of the
premises and such vehicle shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) tons capacity.
12-5.3 Parking of Boat, Trailer, R.V. or Mobile Home
In any Residential District placing a boat, trailer, or mobile home shall be prohibited, except that outside
the Flood Plain Area one (1) trailer as defined in Chapter 2 or one (1) boat may be parked or stored in a
garage or other accessory building. Outdoor storage of a boat or trailer is prohibited in any front yard, side
yard, or required rear yard in any Residential District. No occupancy for human habitation shall be
maintained or business conducted therein while such trailer or boat is so parked or stored. The wheels or
any similar transporting devices of any such trailer permitted within any Residential District shall not be
removed, nor shall any trailer be temporarily or permanently affixed to the ground or attached to something
having a temporary or permanent location on the ground.
12-5.4 Parking of Inoperable or Abandoned Vehicles
The parking or storage of inoperable, abandoned, or junk vehicles (see definition for junk vehicle) is
prohibited outdoors in all districts, except as otherwise provided for in this resolution. No vehicle shall at
any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
The location and duration or temporary parking or storage of an unlicensed operable vehicle may be
approved by the Zoning Inspector through the issuance of a Temporary Zoning Certificate on the basis of
the adequacy of the parcel size, condition of the vehicle, visibility from other properties and absence of
undue adverse impact on adjacent property or on the area as a whole.
12-5.5 Traffic Patterns
All parking garages and lots shall be located and designed to encourage minimal routing of traffic along
public rights-of-way contiguous to blocks that contain primary education facilities or recreation sites
designed for children or which have over fifty percent (50%) of their frontage developed with single- or
two-family dwellings.
12-6 LANDSCAPING FOR VEHICULAR USE AREAS
12-6.1 Applicability
(a) Scope. The application of the landscape regulations established by this Section shall be limited to the same
scope as defined in Sections 12-2.1 and 12-2.2 of this Chapter.
(b) Exception. Vehicular use areas containing less than five (5) parking spaces shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Section 12-6.
Where the total parking provided is located in more than one location on a site and each location contains
less than five (5) parking spaces, each such area shall be exempt from Section 12-6 if separated on all sides
by at least twenty feet (20') of non-paved area.
(c) Alteration or expansion. Where an existing vehicular use area containing less than five (5) contiguous
parking spaces is expanded and thereby contains five (5) or more contiguous parking spaces, landscaping for
the entire area shall be provided and not merely to the extent of its expansion.
12-6.2 Total Landscaping Required
The total landscaping required in vehicular use areas is 22 sq. ft. per parking and stacking space. Interior
and streetscape landscaping count toward the minimum square feet of landscaping required per parking
space. Boundary buffers do not count toward the minimum square feet of landscaping required per parking
space
12-6.3 Interior Landscaping Standards
Interior landscaping shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Design. Landscape areas shall be peninsular, island types, or tree islands as defined in Section 12.
Location. All parking spaces must be at least within 100 feet of a landscaped area.
Retail uses having a sidewalk abutting or parallel to the storefront, three (3) feet of landscaping between the
sidewalk and vehicular use area is required for at least 50% of the entire building frontage. The storefront
landscape buffer must be evenly distributed along the entire building frontage. Shrubs no lower than one (1)
foot in height and other ground cover must be planted in the buffer zone at a ratio of not less than 30 per 100
feet of buffer.
Office uses that have a sidewalk abutting or parallel to the building, three (3) feet of landscaping between the
sidewalk and vehicular use area is required for 100% of the entire building frontage. (This requirement does
not include walkways for ingress and egress to the building) The landscape buffer must be evenly distributed
along the entire building frontage. Shrubs no lower than one (1) foot in height and other ground cover must
be planted in the buffer zone at a ratio of not less than 30 per 100 feet of buffer.
(b) Minimum Area. The minimum landscape area shall be one hundred (100) square feet, except as provided for
in Section 12-6.3(h)
(c) Surface. Any landscape area provided under this Section shall not contain bare soil. Any ground area shall
be covered with stones, mulch, vegetative ground cover, or other surface permeable by water.
(d) Retention Basins. Natural or landscaped detention basins may count toward minimum square footage
landscaping requirements.
(e) Traffic Visibility. No landscaping shall obscure visibility at vehicular intersections with the parking area or
other areas where clear visibility is necessary to assure safe circulation. Where safe visibility is impaired,
canopy trees shall have branches removed from the trunk at least five feet (5') above the ground and shrubs
or groundcover shall not exceed two feet (2') in height. Evergreen trees and under story trees that would
impair visibility for safe circulation shall not be planted in these areas.
(f) Minimum Width. No interior landscaping area shall be less than ten feet (10') by ten feet (10'), except as
provided for in Section 12-6.3(h).
(g) Tree Islands. Individual tree islands are permitted in parking lots. Trees located in these islands may be
applied to the total number of required trees, as well and in the impervious surface ratio calculation and
distance requirements pertaining to parking space locations. These islands are permitted at the junction of
four parking spaces, with an area not to exceed (25) twenty five square feet. Trees should be of a canopy or
under story variety.
12-6.4 Determination of Interior Landscape Requirements
The Landscape Requirements shall be computed as follows:
(a) Interior Landscape Area Requirement. Determine the landscape area by multiplying the Landscape Area
Requirement of 22 sq. ft. per parking and stacking space (Sec. 12-6.2) by the total number of parking spaces
on the lot.
(b) Planting Requirements. To determine the minimum number of canopy trees, use the rate of two (2) canopy
tree for each 10 parking spaces for retail uses and three (3) canopy trees for each 10 parking spaces for nonretail
uses. Any fractional number of trees should be calculated to the next highest whole number.
To determine the total number of required shrubs, multiply the total number of required canopy trees by three
(3). One canopy tree may substitute for 3 shrubs. Trees and shrubs do not have to be equally spaced, but
may be grouped.
12-6.5 Overlap
When any portion of the parcel is subject to more than one set of landscape or buffer requirements as set
forth in this or any other Chapter, the most stringent requirement shall control. The most stringent
requirements shall be defined as those which require the highest fence, wall or screen or, if no fence, wall
or screen is required, the requirements with the greatest quantity of landscaping.
12-6.6 Credit
Existing trees and shrubs, fences, walls or berms on a parcel may be used to meet the requirements if they
meet the standards established in this Chapter and in Chapter 15, Section 15-6, Credit for Existing
Landscape Materials.
12-6.7 Plant Installation and Maintenance Standards
All new plant material as part of the requirements for this Chapter shall be in accordance with Chapter 15,
General Landscape Material Standards.
12-6.8 Modifications
In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site, the size of the parcel to be
developed, the extent of expansion or redevelopment of the site or parking area is deemed to be
insignificant, or the presence of existing buffers on adjacent developed property would make strict
adherence to the requirements of this Chapter serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically
impossible to install and maintain the required landscaping, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
or the Board of Zoning Appeals (per Section 12-6.9) may, upon proper application by the property owner,
and upon making findings of fact, modify the requirements of this Chapter provided the existing or
resulting landscape features of the development site comply with the spirit and intent of this Chapter,
Chapter 14 and other related Chapters.
12-6.9 Authority
The authority to approve landscape modifications resides with the Commission or Board that approves
each specific type of zoning request.
12-7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
The following restrictions shall apply to any outdoor lighting located in any district on parcels where there are
parking spaces for five (5) or more vehicles.
12-7.1 Height
All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, and mounted at heights no greater than sixteen feet (16')
above grade for non-cutoff lights and thirty-two feet (32') above grade for cutoff lights A greater height
may be authorized in any district by a Variance approved pursuant to, Chapter 21.
12-7.2 Illumination
All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located with a maximum illumination of 0.5 foot candles at the
property line.
NON CUT-OFF LIGHT &CUT-OFF LIGHT
12-7.3 Shielding
All outdoor lighting for non-residential uses shall be located, screened, or shielded so that adjacent lots
located in residential districts are not directly illuminated.
12-7.4 Color and Glare
No outdoor lighting shall be of such an intensity or color distortion as to cause glare or to impair the vision
of drivers or pedestrians.
12-7.5 Luminaire Type
Outdoor light lamps shall be of types recommended in the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
Development Plan Guideline 91-3, located in Appendix 3.
12-7.6 Factors for Evaluation
The following factors shall be considered in the evaluation of lighting plans:
(a) Pole Height
(b) Type of Luminaire
(c) Site Coverage - average maintained
(d) Uniformity: (1) Maximum:Minimum (2) Average:Minimum
(e) Intensity at Property Line
12-7.7 Location
Outdoor lighting need not comply with the yard requirements of this Resolution, except that no such light
shall obstruct sight triangles as defined in Section 14-9.
12-8 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
12-8.1 Scope of Application
The application of the loading regulations established by this Section shall be limited to the same scope as
defined in Sections 12-2.1 and 12-2.2 of this Chapter.
12-8.2 Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for commercial and industrial uses in accordance with the
schedule set forth below. Loading spaces shall not conflict with or overlap with the area used for parking.
SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING
SPACES
Gross Floor Area of Structure
(square feet)
Number of
Required
Loading Spaces
0 - 10,000
10,001 - 50,000
50,001 - 100,000
100,001 - 200,000
200,001 - 400,000
Each additional 200,000
0
1
2
3
4
1
12-8.3 General Standards
Every loading space shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and
requirements set forth below.
(a) Location of Required Loading Spaces. Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or
structure to which they are accessory. No loading space shall be located in any required front yard, nor shall
it permit any vehicle to extend into any front yard or across any lot line of a more restrictive district while
being loaded or unloaded.
(b) Dimensions. No required loading space shall be less than twelve feet (12') in width or thirty-five (35') feet in
length or have a vertical clearance of less than fourteen feet (14').
(c) Access. Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide access to a street or alley in a manner that
will create the least possible interference with traffic movement and parking lot circulation. Access to and
from loading spaces shall be approved by the Administrative Official.
(d) Surface and Drainage. Every loading space shall meet the surface and drainage requirements of
Section 12-4.5.
(e) Screening. All operations, material, and vehicles within any loading space that are visible from public streets
or from residential uses shall be screened. The screening material shall be at least six feet (6') in height, 100
percent opaque, and shall meet the requirements for screening as set forth in Chapter 15, Section 15-4.
12-9 VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD REQUIREMENTS
12-9.1 Minimum Setbacks
Any vehicular storage yard shall be located behind the minimum building setback for the site.
12-9.2 Screening
All vehicular storage yards that are visible from public roads or residential districts shall be screened. The
screening material shall be at least six feet (6') in height, and shall meet the requirements for screening as
set forth in Chapter 15, Section 15-4.
TABLE 12-9
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES FORMULA
Accessory Apartment One space for apartment + two for single-family house
Apartments/Attached condominium units One and one-half spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom
unit; two spaces for each unit with two or more bedrooms
Bed and Breakfast Two spaces for owner + one space for each guest room.
Boarding House One space per bedroom + one space per employee
Day Care, Child, Type A and Type B One space per four children of licensed capacity + one space per
employee in addition to the required spaces for the dwelling
Dormitory, Fraternity, Sorority One space for each three beds + one space per employee
Granny Cottage One space per bedroom
Group Home One space per employee on shift of max. employment + two
visitors spaces or one space per employee plus one space per two
residents where residents can own vehicles
Single-Family, Two-Family, Townhouse,
Manufactured/Mobile Home
One and one-half spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom
unit; two spaces for each unit with two or more bedrooms
Three-Family One and one-half spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom
unit; two spaces for each unit with two or more bedrooms
COMMERCIAL USES FORMULA
Amphitheater, Arena, Auditorium,
Banquet, Exhibition or Meeting Halls,
Stadium
One space for each three seats or one space per 50 sq. ft. of net
floor area where fixed seating is not available
Amusement Park One space for each three persons at capacity
Art Gallery, Antique Store, Interior
Decorator Service
One space per 300 sq. ft. of net floor area
Automobile and Truck Rental One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Automobile Sales (Accessory Service) One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area of sales, shop or
garage + one space per employee
Automobile Service Two spaces per service bay (excluding the bay)+ one space per
employee and one space per vehicle used in operation of the
service
Banking / Financial Institution
(Drive-in Service Window - Sec. 10-9)
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area + stacking space for
drive-in service lane (Sec 10-9)
Batting Cage One space per cage + one space per employee
Barber Shops & Beauty Salon One space per 100 square feet of net floor area
Billiard Parlor or Pool Room One space per 100 square feet of net floor area
Bowling Alley Six spaces per lane
Building Materials, Sales and
Distribution
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Car Wash, Automated Five stacking spaces for each automated car wash lane.
Car Wash, Self Service Four stacking spaces for each stall + two drying spaces for each
stall
Convenience Store (with gas pumps) One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area + one space per pump
+ one space per employee
Delicatessens, Bakery Goods, Meat, Fruit
& Vegetable Markets
One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area.
Drive-In or Drive-Through Facility Five stacking spaces per lane + one space per employee if
entirely drive-through
Durable Goods, Carpet, Furniture and
Appliances, Sales & Rental
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Funeral Home or Mortuary One space per 75 sq. ft. of parlor or chapel space or one per five
seats, whichever is greater, but not less than 20 spaces
Health & Fitness Facility One space per 200 sq. ft. net floor area
TABLE 12-9
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Gasoline Service Station (with repair) One space per pump + one space per employee + two spaces per
service bay (excluding the bay space) and one space per vehicle
used in operation of the service
Golf Driving Range One space for each driving tee + one per employee
Grocery Store One space per 167 sq. ft. of net floor area
Gun Firing Range One space for each station + one per employee
Heliport One space for each four seats in waiting area + one space for
each two employees on maximum shift
Machinery, Boat, Truck, Farm &
Construction Equipment Sales, Rental &
Service
One space per 1000 sq. ft of net floor area + one space per 2,500
sq. ft. of outdoor display area + one space per employee.
Miniature Golf Course Two spaces per hole + one space for each 100 sq. ft. of net floor
area for other indoor game activities
Motorcycle, Sales & Service One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Motel/Hotel One space per lodging unit, meeting rooms and restaurants
calculated separately
Office (Excluding Medical) Office Buildings 0-20,000 sq ft: Four spaces for the first 1,000
sq ft plus 1 space for every 400 sq ft net area over 1,000 sq ft
(Ratio 2.5/1000sq ft)
Office Buildings 20,001 sq and up: Four spaces for the first
1,000 sq ft plus 1 space for every 250 sq ft net area over 1,000 sq
ft (Ratio 4/1000sq ft)
Office, Medical / Clinic Six spaces +One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor space in
excess of 1000 sq. ft.
Photo Lab, Picture, TV or Sound Studio One space per one and one-half employees + one space per
facility vehicle
Recycling Drop-off Facility One space per drop-off and five stacking spaces per lane + one
space per employee
Restaurant / Bar One space per 100 sq. ft. of net floor area
Restaurant Drive-In Five stacking spaces per lane
Retail, Sales and Service One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area
Service Establishments: Dry Cleaning or
Laundry Pick-Up Stations, Print Shops,
Tailoring, Shoe or Hat Repair
One space per 300 sq. ft. of net floor area
Shopping Center One space per 222 sq. ft of net floor area of general retail space
+ additional spaces, as required herein, for associated offices,
theaters, and restaurants
Skating Facility One space per 250 square feet of net floor area
Studio: Art, Dance, Gymnastics, Music Five spaces, plus one space for each 150 sq. ft. of net floor area
in excess of 500 sq. ft.
Swimming Pools, Tennis or Racquet
Clubs, and Similar Recreation Facilities
Open To The Public For A Fee
One parking space for each 50 square feet of pool area; eight
spaces for each indoor tennis court; five spaces for each outdoor
tennis court; five spaces for each racquet ball and/or handball
court
Theater, Motion Picture or Live
Performance
One space per four seats
INDUSTRIAL USES FORMULA
Automobile Body Shop Two spaces per service bay (excluding the bay)+ one space per
employee and one space per vehicle used in operation of the
service
Flammable Liquids/Gases, Heating Fuel
Distribution and Storage
One space per employee on maximum work shift + one space
per facility vehicle used in operation of the service
Laundry, Dry Cleaning, Linen, Diaper
Service (plant on premises)
One space per two employees + one space per facility vehicle
TABLE 12-9
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Manufacturing, Transfer Station,
Research Lab
One space per one and one-half employees on maximum work
shift + one space per facility vehicle
Mini-Storage Facility Three spaces + one space per 100 individual storage units
Outside Storage Two spaces for the first 2,000 sq. ft. + one space for each
additional 2,000 sq. ft.
Package Delivery Service, Truck
Terminal, Taxicab Barn
One space per one and one-half employees + one space per
facility vehicle
Recycling Facility One space per employee or volunteer on largest work shift + one
space per collection vehicle + two drop-off spaces for each bay
and/or collection vehicle and container
Telecommunication Towers One space
Vehicle Storage Yard One space per employee on maximum shift + one space per
facility vehicle + one space per 250 sq. ft. net floor area
Warehouse, Display Room for Wholesale
Activities
One space per two employees on maximum work shift or for
2,000 square feet of warehouse floor area + additional space for
office area as per general office requirements, whichever is
greater.
INSTITUTIONAL USES FORMULA
Cemetery One space per employee
Church or Temples One space per four seats or bench seating in the main assembly
room.
Correctional Facility One space per employee + one space per 25 inmates
Day Care Center, Child, Pre-School One space per employee + one space for each facility vehicle
stored on the lot + one parking space for each six children
Halfway House One space per bed + one per employee
Hospital One parking space per bed
Nursing, Convalescent Home, &
Continuing Care Facility
One space per six residents + one space per employee
School, Elementary (K-6) One space for each three seats in any auditorium, or one space
for each classroom, whichever is greater
School, Junior High/Middle School One space for each three seats in any auditorium, or one space
for each classroom, whichever is greater
School, Senior High One space per employee + twelve visitor spaces, plus one space
per six students
School, Vocational / Professional One space per employee + one space per two registered student
capacity
University or College One space per two employees + one space per four students
PUBLIC SERVICE USES FORMULA
Government Buildings One space per 250 sq. ft. of net floor area or one space per four
patrons, whichever is greater
Government Storage Yard One space per employee on maximum shift + one space per
facility vehicle + one space per 250 sq. ft. net floor area
Library One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Police & Fire Stations One space per employee on maximum shift + one space per
facility vehicle + one space per 250 sq. ft. net floor area
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL &
ENTERTAINMENT USES
FORMULA
Athletic/Play Field Ten spaces per acre
Botanical Garden Four spaces per acre of grounds
Campground One space per campsite + one space per employee
Club, Private One space for each 50 square feet of net floor area used for
assembly, game room, dancing or dining, plus one for each
sleeping room
Community (recreation) Center One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area
TABLE 12-9
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Golf Course Four spaces for each hole + one space for 100 sq. ft. of net floor
area in any cocktail lounge, bar, or similar facility.
Museum One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Outdoor drama theater (not drive-in) One space for each three seats
Parks, Playgrounds Four spaces per acre
Tennis or Racquet Clubs, and Similar
Recreation Facilities
Eight spaces for each indoor tennis court; five spaces for each
outdoor tennis court; five spaces for each racquet ball and/or
handball court
Recreation center, Internal One space per 250 sq. ft. of net floor area
Summer Camp One space per employee + one space per each camp vehicle +
one space per five users at maximum capacity
Swim Facility One parking space for each 50 square feet of pool area + one per
employee
Zoo One space per 2000 sq. ft. of land area
AGRICULTURAL USES FORMULA
Farm Market One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area
Fishing Lake One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area + five spaces per acre
of lake
Kennel, Commercial One space per 1000 sq. ft. of net floor area + one space per
employee + one drop-off space per twenty kennel spaces.
Nursery, Greenhouse One space per 250 sq. ft. of indoor net floor area + one space
per 1000 sq. ft. of net outdoor sales / display areas + one space
for each 1.5 employees
Stable One space per 4 stalls + one space per employee
Veterinarian Facility Three parking spaces for the first 750 sq. feet or fraction thereof,
plus one space for each 300 square feet of net floor area in
excess of 750 square feet
CHAPTER 13
SIGNS
13-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and encourage the orderly development of signs so as to protect the public
health, safety, welfare, and morals of the Township while recognizing the need for adequate business identification,
informational and advertising communication and the value of visual attractiveness.
13-2 SCOPE
The regulations of this Chapter shall govern and control the erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation,
maintenance and relocation of any sign that is visible from any street, sidewalk or public or private common open
space. These regulations shall also govern the removal of signs determined to be physically unsafe or which create
a safety hazard to the public. The regulations of this Chapter dictate the types, location and physical standards of
signs that are permissible for specified uses, subject to the sign permit procedures of this Chapter. The regulations
of this Chapter shall be in addition to any provisions of Chapter 5516 of the Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio Basic
Building Code (OBBC) applicable to the construction and maintenance of signs.
13-3 DEFINITION OF TERMS
Words, terms, or phrases, not otherwise defined in this section, shall have, for the purpose of this Resolution, the
meaning or meanings attributed to them in English usage current at the time of adoption of this Resolution, and
words used in the present tense shall include the future. The word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive. For the
purposes of this Chapter, signs and their features and characteristics shall be defined and classified as follows:
A. FREESTANDING SIGNS
Pole Sign A permanent freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, poles or braces
placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. Such sign may
also be commonly known as a pylon sign.
Ground Sign A permanent freestanding sign other than a pole or pylon sign, not attached to a building,
which is placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure.
Such sign may also be known as a monument sign.
B. BUILDING SIGNS
Awning sign A building sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an awning and does not
project vertically above or horizontally beyond the physical dimensions of such awning.
Marquee Sign A building sign attached to a marquee, canopy or awning projecting from or supported
by the building at main entrances.
Projecting Sign A building sign which projects more than 18 inches from and is supported by a wall of a
building and does not extend beyond the minimum required setback line or into and over
street right-of-way, and not less than 8.5 feet at its lowest point, above sidewalk or ground
level.
Wall Sign (Facia
Sign)
A building sign which is attached directly to a building wall and which does not extend
more than eighteen (18) inches from nor above the roof line or beyond the limits of the
outside wall, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall.
Window Sign A building sign affixed to, in contact with, or inside a window; installed for purposes of
viewing from outside the premises. This does not include merchandise located in a
window.
C. TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary Sign A sign which is neither permanently anchored to the ground nor permanently affixed to a
structure, nor mounted on a chassis, and intended for a limited period of display.
Balloon Sign A temporary sign on an inflated nonporous object filled with air or other gas.
Banner Sign A temporary sign in the nature of a flag, pennant, streamer or ribbon
Construction Sign A temporary sign located on premises, which provides information pertaining to the
builder, owner, project, or the contractor constructing the development.
Festival Banner
Sign
A temporary sign on a banner related to public festivals installed on public property or in
the public right-of-way.
Festival Device
Signs
A temporary sign on balloons, umbrellas and similar devices.
Flag, Pennant or
Other Moving or
Animated Sign
Any temporary sign or part of such sign that changes physical position by any movement
or rotation of that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
Political Campaign
Sign
A temporary sign advertising candidates or soliciting votes in support of or against any
proposition or issue at any general, primary, special, school or any other election.
Public Event
Banner Sign
A temporary sign on a banner, which provides information on current or upcoming public
events, attached to a facility owned or controlled by the Township or any agency thereof
and which is not be installed more than 2 weeks before the event.
Real Estate Sign A temporary sign located on premises containing land or buildings for sale, rent or lease,
or buildings under construction and intended for sale, rent or lease.
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS
Address or
Building Number
Sign
A freestanding or wall sign which identifies the address of the property.
Billboard (Outdoor
Advertising Sign)
A type of off-premises sign, classified as a business use, generally but not limited to a
rigidly assembled sign, display, or device, usually free standing, that is affixed to the
ground or to a building, the primary purpose of which is to display advertising posters.
Such signs commonly referred to as “billboards” or “poster panels” are generally
designed so that the copy or poster on the sign can be changed and the advertising space
may be leased.
Billboard, Bulletin A standardized off-site advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 672 sq. ft. (14 ft. x
48 ft.), excluding temporary embellishments, cut outs or extensions as herein defined.
Billboard, Junior
Poster Panel
A standardized off-site advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 72 sq. ft. (6 ft. x 12
ft. ), excluding temporary embellishments, cut-outs, or extensions as herein defined. Also
called a Eight-Sheet poster.
Billboard, Poster
Panel
A standardized off-site advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 300 sq. ft. (12 ft. x
25 ft.), excluding temporary embellishments, cut-outs or extensions as herein defined.
Also called a 30-sheet poster.
Billboard Cut-out A treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign by removal, deletion, or omission
of any portion of the sign.
Billboard
Embellishment
A temporary treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign that reflects a
community design theme, an historic period or artistic style.
Billboard
Extension
A treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign by addition of a sign face area or
projection thereof.
Bulletin Board,
Institutional
A sign located on the property owned or operated by a public, religious, institutional,
school, library, community center or similar institution which is used to identify the name
of the institution or organization and the announcement of its services or activities.
Canopy A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material which may be
totally or partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or
automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely
enclosed structure and does not raise, nor is it capable of retraction.
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS ,CONT.
Changeable Copy
Sign
An sign designed so that the characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign; also known as a reader
board.
Clear Sight
Triangle
The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on
intersecting lines of a right-of-way , easement of access, or pavement edge of an access
drive, each point being 20 feet from the intersecting lines. See Chapter 14, Section 14-9,
Figure 14D.
Clearance (of a
Sign)
The smallest average vertical distance between the grade of where the sign is attached and
the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over
that grade. (Compare “Height”)
Development or
Business, New
A business or development that begins commercial activity at a new location or that
changes it’s name.
Directional or
Informational Sign
An on-premises sign designed to guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic by using such
words as “Entrance”, “Exit”, “Parking”, “One-Way”, or similar directional instruction,
and which may include the identification of the building or use but does not include any
advertising message.
Facade That portion of an enclosed building facing the street or that wall of a building through
which there is primary access for customers. Where more than one business occupies the
same building the facade for each business shall be that portion of the building occupied
by the business which faces the street or which provides the primary access.
Face Change The removal or replacement of an existing surface display panel where the remaining
structural frame is not changed. The changing of the copy or poster on bulletin boards
and billboards is not considered a face change.
Flashing Sign A sign that uses an intermittent, moving or flashing light source to attract attention.
Frontage, Building Total lineal feet of enclosed building length along the facade that fronts the principal
dedicated street, or the facade that contains the main entrance to the building.
Frontage, Street or
Lot
Total lineal feet of right-of-way or easement of access along the front yard of a lot.
Frontage, Principle The street which the developer selects to be the main entrance.
Frontage,
Secondary
The street which the developer selects to be the secondary access to the development.
Gas Pump Signs Informational matter appearing on gasoline pumps as purchased or installed.
Government Sign Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for any official governmental
purpose.
Height (of a Sign) The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative
embellishments, to the average surface grade where the sign is attached. (Compare:
“Clearance”)
Historical Marker A type of memorial sign limited in content to the identification of an historical building or
structure or the site of an historical event.
Identification Sign A sign giving the name, trademark of other readily recognized symbol or address, or any
combination thereof, of a building, business, development or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
Illuminated Sign A sign either internally or externally illuminated.
Joint Identification
Sign
A sign which serves as common or collective identification for a group of businesses
operating on the same building lot. Such signs may name the businesses included but
carry no other advertising.
Logo A business trademark or symbol.
Maintenance The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that
does not alter the basic copy, design or structure of the sign.
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS ,CONT.
Marquee Any fixed hood (other than a canopy or awning), which is supported solely by the
building to which it is attached, consisting of metal or other incombustible material and
which included a sign or advertising announcement. The location of marquees shall be
restricted to the main entrance to a building.
Memorial Plaque A plaque designating names of buildings and/or date of erection and other items such as
architect, contractor, or others involved in the building’s creation, cut into or attached to a
building surface.
Nonconforming
Sign
Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations in force at
the time and maintained prior to the effective date of this Zoning Resolution, and which
fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this Resolution.
Off-Premises
Directional Sign
A sign designed to guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to places of worship, to
businesses, to places that provide commodities, services, entertainment or attractions at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is erected.
Off-Premises (Off-
Site) Advertising
Sign
An advertising sign, whose message relates to a business, service, commodity, or
profession being conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which
the sign is erected.
Official Flag or
Emblem
A flag or emblem of a government or of a membership organization.
On-Premises (On-
Site) Sign
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or
attraction sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is erected.
Portable Sign A sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, but usually
anchored or secured to a trailer, vehicle (where the primary purpose is to advertise) or
frame capable of being moved from place to place.
Premises Any tract or tracts of land which comprise a single, integrated development or use of such
land. For the purpose of this Chapter 13, an out parcel along the perimeter of a shopping
center or similar multi-tenant use, which contains a freestanding building and a parking
area separate from the shopping center as indicated on an approved site plan shall be
considered a premises separate from the premises of the shopping center.
Roof Sign A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent
upon a building for support and that projects above the highest point of a building with a
flat roof, the eave line of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a
building with a mansard roof.
Public Service Sign
or Device
A sign or device displaying only the time, temperature, stock market quotations or civic
messages by means of a lamp bank.
Sign Any object, device, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and intended
to be visible from the exterior of the structure which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Signs do not include the flag
or emblem of any nation, organization or nations, state, township, city, or any fraternal,
religious or civic organizations; works of art which in no way identify a product or
business logo.
Sign Graphics Any lettering, numerals, figures, designs, symbols or other drawing or images used to
create a sign.
Sign Structure or
Support
Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover.
Snipe Sign A sign for which a permit has not been obtained which is attached to a public utility pole,
light pole, service pole or supports for another sign.
Surface Display
Area
All solid surface areas of a sign, excluding air space. Structural members bearing no sign
copy shall not be included
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS ,CONT.
T-Frame Sign A sign whose structure or frame is in the form of a “T” upon which one or more sign
faces may be hung or otherwise attached.
Variable Message
Sign
A sign containing a computer generated message such as a public service, time,
temperature or date, where different copy changes of a public service or commercial
nature are shown on the same lamp bank or message facility.
Vending Machine
Sign
Any sign fastened to or painted on a vending machine which directly relates to the
product contained in the machine.
Vehicular Sign Signs on parked vehicles or boats visible from the public right-of-way where the primary
purpose of the vehicle or boat is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or
activity located on the same or nearby property. For the purpose of this ordinance
vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles
primarily used for other business purposes.
Visible Capable of being seen, whether or not legible, without visual aid by a person of normal
acuity.
Warning Sign A sign limited in content to messages conveying warning, caution or danger.
13-4 ZONING CERTIFICATE AND PERMITS
13-4.1 Zoning Certificate Required
Unless expressly exempted in Section 13-4.2, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered
(including face changes), relocated or reconstructed on private or public property unless a Sign Zoning
Certificate evidencing the compliance of such sign with the provisions of this Chapter 13 shall have first
been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
13-4.2 Exemptions
The following signs and sign-related activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter 13 and
shall not require a zoning certificate:
(a) Routine Maintenance. Routine sign maintenance including cleaning re-painting, replacing lamps and ballast
and electrical components and changing of lettering or parts of signs designed to be regularly changed.
(b) Signs Permitted in all Districts. Signs permitted in all districts as listed in Section 13-9.
(c) Poster Changes. Off-site advertising signs shall be allowed changes in the poster advertisement or reader
board. Further modifications may be subject to the provisions of Sec. 13-4.3.
(d) Copy Changes. The change of a message relating to on site or off site changeable copy signs such as those
displaying gasoline prices, sale items, special events or lottery information.
13-4.3 Nonconforming or Noncomplying Signs
Signs existing on or before the effective date of this resolution that do not conform to the standards in this
Chapter are considered nonconforming and shall be subject to the following provisions. If the size of an
existing sign face or the size of the overall structure is increased; the structure is relocated; the structure is
replaced; the structure is abandoned, does not advertise an occupied building, or the structure is damaged
requiring replacement of any part of the structure or attached cabinet then said sign shall be ordered
removed or brought into full compliance with this Chapter by the Zoning Administrator.
13-5 GENERAL STANDARDS
Unless expressly exempted by Section 13-4.2 above, all signs within the Township shall conform to the following
general standards.
13-5.1 Type
Except as otherwise noted or permitted, all freestanding signs are to be ground signs as defined by Section
13-3 and as further regulated in Section 13.
13-5.1.1Illumination
(a) Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external artificial light source is used to illuminate a
sign, such source shall be so designed, located, shielded and directed so as not to be directly visible from any
public street or residence. If ground lighting is used to illuminate a sign, the receptacle or device shall not
protrude more than twelve (12) inches and must be fully screened from view by landscaping material.
(b) Level of Illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any off-site advertising sign exceed 50 foot
candles at the sign face.
(c) Flashing Lights Prohibited. Except when expressly permitted by this Chapter, no flashing, moving, laser
generated, strobe, blinking or intermittent lights shall be permitted on or as part of any sign. This does not
pertain to electronic message signs unless they negatively affect traffic safety.
13-5.2 Height
(a) Height of Building Signs.
(1) Building Signs shall be located within the limits of the outside wall of the building.
(2) Marquee, canopy or projecting signs shall be located at a minimum height of 8.5 feet above grade.
In order to encourage uniform design, wall signs on the same facade shall maintain the same height above
grade except where there are: facade or elevation changes; anchor tenants; multiple lines of copy;
variations in the size of upper and lower case letters; or similar circumstances in which exceptions are
required.
(b) Height of Freestanding Signs.
(1) Freestanding signs in the Residential district are permitted at a maximum height of 6 feet.
(2) Freestanding signs in the (E) Retail district are permitted at a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
One (1) additional foot of height is permitted for every three (3) feet beyond the required setback
up to a maximum sign height of 15 feet, or as further regulated in Section 13-12.3.
(3) Freestanding signs in the (O) Office districts are permitted at a maximum height of six (6) feet.
One (1) additional foot of height is permitted for every five (5) feet beyond the required setback
up to a maximum sign height of 15 feet.
(4) Freestanding signs in the (F) Light Industrial district are permitted at a maximum height of six (6)
feet. One (1) additional foot of height is permitted for every five (5) feet beyond the required
setback up to a maximum sign height of 15 feet.
(5) Freestanding signs in the (I) Institutional district are permitted at a maximum height of six (6)
feet. One (1) additional foot of height is permitted for every five (5) feet beyond the required
setback up to a maximum sign height of 15 feet.
(6) Freestanding signs are permitted within the Clear Sight Triangle at a maximum height of three (3)
feet or as provided in section 13-5.5.
(7) Directional signs are permitted in all districts to a maximum height of five (5) feet and a
maximum area of six (6) square feet
13-5.3 Minimum Setback
All signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet (5 feet for directional signs) from the right-of-way,
easement of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater setback, and 5 feet from all other
property lines. A side lot setback adjoining a residential district shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet
from the adjoining residential district. With the exception of directional signs, all signs must be located
outside of any clear site triangle as described in Section 13-3.
13-5.4 Obstruction of Access ways
No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other
required access way.
13-5.5 Traffic Safety
(a) Confusion with Traffic Signals. No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position,
size, shape, content, color, or illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be
confused with, any traffic control sign, or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic
regardless whether or not it meets other size, location and setback requirements of this Section 13-5.
13-5.6 Signs in Rights-of-Way
No sign except government signs authorized by this Chapter shall be placed in or extend into or over any
public property or right-of-way.
13-5.7 Sign Identification
All signs shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation hanging or erecting the
sign.
13-5.8 Sign Maintenance
The owner of an on-site or off-site sign shall be liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination
sources, in compliance with this Chapter and all applicable laws, in a safe and secure condition, and in a
neat and orderly condition and good-working order at all times, and to prevent the development of any rust,
corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical appearance or safety of such sign.
13-5.9 Sign Allotment, Maximum Size and Location
Freestanding signs shall be located within 30 feet of the street frontage from which the allotment is
computed.
Building signs shall be located within the area which the allotment is computed.
13-5.10 Architectural Features
Sign architectural or design features which are integrated into the sign structure may not exceed 50 percent
of the sign surface area.
13-5.11 Sign Base
All freestanding signs are to be constructed with a base made up of stone, brick, or other architecturally
compatible base material. The sign is to be connected to the base. The sign base shall be made of a
material that is compatible with the principal structure on the lot which the sign is located.
13-6 SIGN MEASUREMENT
(See diagrams in Figure 13-6A)
13-6.1 Area of a Freestanding Sign
The area of a freestanding sign shall be determined by computing the visible surface display area, that is,
all solid surface areas excluding air space and architectural and design features. If the angle separating two
faces of a V-shaped sign is more than 45 degrees or 10 feet, the sign faces visible from one point are added
cumulatively as one sign face.
13-6.2 Area of Building Signs
The area of a building sign shall be determined by computing the visible surface display area, that is the
words, numbers, and/or graphics which are totally enclosed by a frame or graphic design. In the case of
words containing lower case letters mounted individually to the wall of the building, the area of the sign is
the square footage area that is measured by taking the height of the lower case letters multiplied by the total
word length and adding the height of the uppercase letters multiplied by the letter(s) length.
13-6.3 Exceptions
In a residential development where the sign identifying the name of the development is attached to a wall
or fence, the area of the sign shall be calculated as a building sign per subsection (2) of Section 13-6.2.
FIGURE 13-6A: SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
(VISIBLE SURFACE DISPLAY AREA)
POLE OR PYLON SIGN POLE OR PYLON SIGN
(SINGLE OR MULTIPLE SUPPORT)
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X(H) SIGN FACE AREA = 3.14 R2
V-SHAPED SIGN
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L1 + L2) X H
(considered as one face)
FIGURE 13-6A (CONTINUED):
SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
GROUND SIGN GROUND MONUMENT SIGN
Sign Base may be up to 3 ft. in height
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN
(BILLBOARD)
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
FIGURE 13-6A (CONTINUED)
SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
WALL SIGN
(with frame or graphic enclosure)
AWNING SIGN
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X(H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
WALL SIGNS
(LETTERS MOUNTED INDIVIDUALLY WITHOUT ANY FRAME OR GRAPHIC ENCLOSURE)
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
13-7 SIGNS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
The following signs, in addition to all other signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter 13, are prohibited in all
zoning districts and shall not be erected, or maintained:
(a) Roof Signs.
(b) Signs that move or give the appearance of moving, including pennants, streamers, flags in excess of sixty (60) square
feet, other than government flags and other signs, unless otherwise approved as part of Localized Alternative Sign
Regulations pursuant to Section 13-15. (This section does not prohibit variable message signs or signs designed with
periodic rotation).
(c) Flashing Signs. Signs containing any flashing or running lights or lights creating an illusion of movement, excluding
holiday decorations and time and temperature devices which display time and temperature messages only.
(d) Signs which imitate or are easily confused with official traffic signs and use words such as "stop", "look", "danger",
"go slow", "caution", or "warning," except where such words are part of the name of a business or are accessory to
parking lots.
(e) Signs which are structurally unsafe or hazardous.
(f) Portable signs, except as permitted temporarily in Section 13-12.2.
(g) Snipe signs.
(h) Bench signs.
13-8 PERMITTED SIGNS
No Sign Zoning Certificate shall be issued unless; the type of proposed sign is permitted in the zoning district in
which the sign is to be located as indicated in this chapter, the sign meets the general standards in Section 13-5, the
standards for off-site advertising signs set forth in Section 13-16 and the sign does not, by itself or cumulatively
with other existing or planned signs, exceed these regulations:
13-9 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS AND EXEMPT FROM
ZONING CERTIFICATES
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a fee and without issuance of a zoning certificate
subject to the requirements stated herein. All signs in this section, unless otherwise stated below, shall be setback a
minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way, easement of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater
setback, and 5 feet from all other property lines.
(a) Identification signs, including house numbers legible from the street, and nameplates (fraternal, social,
apartment and professional) identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land, and not exceeding two (2)
square feet in display surface area.
(b) Memorial plaques and historic markers, including those containing the names of buildings and dates of
construction and not exceeding three (3) square feet in display surface area.
(c) For sale signs attached to vehicles.
(d) Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, township, municipality, institution or organization and not
exceeding 60 square feet.
(e) Traffic, or other government signs, also private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the
Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(f) Institutional bulletin boards located on the premises of the institution to which the sign pertains and not
exceeding 20 square feet in surface display area per side, maximum of 2 sides with a maximum height of 6 feet.
(g) Public Park signs.
(h) Non-illuminated signs proclaiming religious or other noncommercial messages not exceeding twelve (12)
square feet in surface display area and 5 (five) feet in height in any residential district nor thirty-two (32) square
feet in any other zoning district.
(i) One temporary construction sign per public street frontage subject to the following:
(1) Total surface display area shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and 6 (six) feet in height in a
Residential District and thirty-two (32) square feet in area and 8 (eight) feet in height in all other Districts.
(2) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign pertains and must be setback at
least 10 feet from the right of way.
(3) The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a zoning certificate for the proposed construction, and
shall be removed upon any final inspection from Sycamore Township.
(j) Trespassing, safety or caution signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
(k) On-Premises directional and informational signs not exceeding six (6) square feet and four feet in height for
pedestrians and vehicles using such words as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "One-Way" but not including any
advertising message (Such signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way, easement
of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater setback).
(l) Gasoline pump signs appearing on legally installed pumps as purchased.
(m) On-premises yard sale or garage sale signs not exceeding six (6) square feet provided they are erected no more
than seven (7) days prior to the sale nor displayed for more than seven (7) consecutive days.
(n) Political campaign signs shall be exempt from the provisions of the Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution.
(o) Church / School Festival signs shall not to exceed 32 square feet in area and 6 (six) feet in height. Such signs
are to be removed within 1 week of the completion of the event.
13-9.1 Real Estate Signs
Non-illuminated real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of a property or building where the sign is
located, not exceeding one per street frontage and twelve (12) square feet of surface display area in any
residential district nor thirty-two (32) square feet in any other zoning district. One Freestanding sign and
one building sign are permitted per property.
(a) For Sale Signs in the Office, Retail, and or Industrial Districts. Signs advertising the sale of a property
or building where the sign is located must be removed within 21 days of the property closing.
(b) For Lease Signs in Office, Retail, and or Industrial Districts. Signs advertising the lease of a property
or building where the sign is located must be removed when the occupancy of the building reaches 95%.
Rent rolls or other real estate documents are to be presented to the Township Zoning Inspector to verify
occupancy percentage.
13-9.2 Commercial Vehicle Signage
Commercial vehicles which advertise business located on or off the premises must be parked behind the
principal building if the square footage of the sign exceeds 15 square feet
13-10 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The following regulations apply to those properties located in the A-A, A, A-2, A35, B, B-2, C, and D Residential
Districts. Any sign not expressly permitted by Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited.
13-10.1 Temporary Signs
One (1) temporary sign shall be permitted on each lot. Such signs may have a sign face area not to exceed
24 square feet. The maximum time that such a sign can be displayed is 60 days per calendar year. The
sign must be affixed to the main structure on the lot for which the sign is intended. Signs in the residential
district must not be illuminated.
13-10.2 Permanent Signs
(a) Home Occupation. One (1) non-illuminated name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface display
area and attached flat against a building wall shall be permitted.
(b) Multi-Family Residential Uses
(1) Building Signs. One wall sign not exceeding 8 square feet of surface area for each 50 feet of building
frontage shall be permitted provided that no such use may have permanent signs with total surface area
exceeding 32 square feet for each principal lot frontage.
(2) Freestanding Signs. One (1) entry wall / sign is permitted at a community entrance and may not exceed
56 square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Any entry sign must be setback at least ten (10) feet of
any public right of way or access road.
(c) Single Family Residential Uses
(1) Freestanding Signs
One (1) entry wall / sign is permitted at a community entrance and may not exceed 56 square feet in area
and six (6) feet in height. Any entry sign must be setback at least 10 feet of any public right of way or
access road.
(d) Other Permissible Uses
Freestanding Signs
(1) Lots having at least 100 feet of frontage may have one freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet of
sign surface area and 6 feet in height.
(2) Building Signs. One building sign not exceeding 32 square feet of sign surface area.
13-10.3 Outdoor Advertising Signs
Outdoor Advertising Signs or Billboards are prohibited in Residential Districts.
13-11 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE “O” OFFICE DISTRICT
These regulations apply to those properties located in the O Office District. Any sign not expressly permitted by
Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited.
13-11.1 Temporary Signs
One (1) temporary sign may be permitted on each lot when approved by the Township. Such signs may
have a maximum total sign surface area of 32 sq ft. The sign may be displayed for up to 60 calendar days
per year. If the temporary sign is removed for more than 2 hours, then a new temporary sign permit is
required. The sign must be affixed to the main structure on the lot for which the sign is intended.
13-11.2 Free Standing Signs
a) An office use with at least 50 feet of road frontage shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to
exceed 24 sq ft.
b) Office uses with at least 100 feet of road frontage shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to
exceed 64 sq ft of sign surface area.
c) Office uses located on corner lots may have a second freestanding sign at a second point of ingress /
egress not to exceed 24 sq ft in sign surface area.
d) An office park containing three (3) or more buildings shall be permitted one joint identification sign
for each principal entrance on a public street, not exceeding 2 faces, neither of which may exceed 60
square feet of surface area and a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
13-11.3 Building Signs
For each office building one-half (.5) square foot of sign surface area shall be permitted for each foot of
building frontage, measured along the primary point of access. Two signs are permitted per building up to
a maximum of 100 sq f total sign surface area.
13-11.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs
Outdoor advertising signs or Billboards are permitted in the O Office District subject to the provisions in
Section 13-16.
13-12 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE “E” RETAIL DISTRICT.
The following regulations shall apply to those properties located in the E Retail District. Any sign not expressly
permitted by Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited.
13-12.1 Temporary Signs
One (1) temporary sign may be permitted on each lot when approved by the Township. Such signs may
have a total maximum sign surface area of 50 sq ft. The sign may be displayed for up to 60 calendar days
per year. If the temporary sign is removed for more than two (2) hours, then a new temporary sign permit
is required. The sign must be affixed to the main structure on the lot for which the sign is intended.
13-12.2 Portable or Movable Signs
Any freestanding sign, including but not limited to "A" frame, or inverted "T" shaped structures, including
those signs mounted on wheeled trailers, shall be permitted for retail uses only in accordance with the
following provisions:
(a) Portable signs are permitted for grand openings, advertising charitable or community-related events and the
like. Being temporary in nature, such portable signs may be permitted for a period not to exceed twenty (20)
days in a calendar year per establishment.
(b) All illuminated portable signs shall comply with the requirements of Section 13-5.1 and the National Electric
Code.
(c) No portable sign shall be located closer than one-half the setback distance from the building setback, to the
street right-of-way line.
(d) No portable sign shall exceed 60 square feet in surface display area.
(e) Only one (1) portable sign shall be permitted per property.
13-12.3 Freestanding Signs
(a) Businesses having less than 50 feet of lot frontage shall not have a freestanding sign.
(b) Businesses having street frontage of more than 50 feet shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to
exceed 64 sq ft of sign surface area.
(c) Businesses and Shopping Centers having more than 50 feet of frontage and over 80,000 sq ft (gross) building
area are permitted up to 100 sq ft of sign surface area at a maximum height of 20 feet. Businesses and
shopping centers (over 80,000 gross square feet) with 2 (two) points of ingress and egress on to a public
road with 100 feet or more of secondary road frontage shall be permitted a second freestanding sign, not to
exceed 64 sq ft in area and 8 feet in height.
(d) Shopping Centers with 5 or more stores and a gross area of 22,000 square feet or less shall be permitted one
freestanding sign not to exceed 80 square feet in area and 15 feet in height.
(e) Shopping Centers with 5 or more stores and a gross area between 22,001 square feet and 79,999 square feet
shall be permitted one freestanding sign not to exceed 15 feet in height and 90 sq ft in area.
(e) Except as noted above, businesses with a secondary point of access are permitted a second freestanding sign
located at that point of access not to exceed 32 square feet in sign surface area and five (5) feet in height.
13-12.4 Building Signs
(a) Any property or business shall be permitted one (1) square foot of Building Sign surface area for each foot of
Building Frontage facing the public street on which the principal access is located. No more than two (2)
signs per building or structure are allowed with the maximum total sign surface area not to exceed 150 square
feet per building or structure.
(b) Shopping Centers consisting of three (3) or more stores shall be permitted one (1) sign per store front at a
ratio of one (1) square foot of sign surface area for each foot of building frontage that faces the center parking
lot or that faces any public road where the principal access is located, not to exceed 100 square feet for any
sign.
13-12.5 Outdoor Advertising Signs
Outdoor advertising signs or Billboards are permitted in the E Retail District subject to the provisions of
Section 13-16.
13-13 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE “F” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The following regulations apply to those properties located in the F Light Industrial District. Any sign not expressly
by permitted by Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited.
13-13.1 Temporary Signs
One (1) temporary sign may be permitted on each lot when approved by the Township. Such signs may
have a total maximum sign surface area of 50 sq ft. The sign may be displayed for up to 60 calendar days
per year. If the temporary sign is removed for more than 2 hours, then a new temporary sign permit is
required. The sign must be affixed to the main structure on the lot for which the sign is intended.
13-13.2 Freestanding Signs
(a) Establishments having less than 50 feet of street frontage may not have a freestanding sign.
(b) Industries having street frontage of more than 50 feet shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to
exceed 64 sq ft of sign surface area.
(c) Industries having more than 50 feet of frontage and over 80,000 sq ft (gross) building area are permitted up
to 100 sq ft of sign surface area at a maximum height of 20 feet.
13-13.3 Building Signs
(a) Any property or business shall be permitted one (1) square foot of building sign surface area for each foot of
building frontage facing the public street on which the principal access is located, up to a maximum of two
(2) building signs and a total sign surface area of 100 sq ft for all building signs.
13-13.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs
Outdoor Advertising signs or Billboards are permitted in the F Light Industrial District pursuant to the
provisions of Section 13-16.
13-15 LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS
13-15.1 Submission of Regulations
A shopping center, office park, industrial park or institutional campus, such as universities or medical
centers, having multiple buildings, may establish localized alternative sign regulations pertaining only to a
particular center, district or campus, as an alternative to the sign regulations that would otherwise be
required under this Chapter 13, if approved as a PUD-1 pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18. If, and to
the extent that localized alternative sign regulations are approved as a PUD-1, such local sign regulations
shall govern. The underlying signage permitted in the specified zoning district shall serve as a guideline
and limitation to the amount of signage allowed under a Localized Alternative Sign Regulation.
13-15.2 Conditions for Approval
No localized alternative sign regulations shall be approved as a PUD-1 unless the regulations are binding
upon all real property and premises in the area (e.g., shopping center, medical center, university campus) to
which the regulations are intended to apply.
13-15.3 Application Procedure
Persons desiring to obtain approval of localized alternative sign regulations pursuant to this Section shall
submit proposed regulations to the Administrative Official, together with any additional material requested
by the Administrative Official. The Administrative Official shall review the regulations and pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 18, shall recommend to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission approval,
approval with modifications, or disapproval of such regulations.
13-15.4 Private Signage Agreements
Nothing in this Chapter 13 shall prevent any persons from establishing, by deed restrictions or private
agreement, sign regulations which are more stringent than those set forth in this Chapter.
13-15.5 Changes to Approved Localized Alternative Sign Regulations
Alternative localized sign regulations which have been approved as a PUD-1 pursuant to Chapter 18 may
be amended or varied only pursuant to the procedures and standards in Chapter 18 for the original
approval.
13-16 BILLBOARDS (OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS)
13-16.1 Zoning Certificate Required
Unless expressly exempted, no off-site advertising sign shall be erected, constructed, permanently
enlarged, expanded, materially altered, relocated or reconstructed unless a Sign Zoning Certificate
evidencing the compliance of such sign with the provisions of this Chapter shall have first been issued by
the Zoning Inspector.
13-16.2 Exemptions
The following sign-related activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter and shall not
require a zoning certificate:
(a) Nonconforming. Off-site advertising signs existing on or before the effective date of this Resolution shall be
allowed changes in the poster advertisement or reader boards. Further modifications may be subject to the
provisions of Sec. 13-4.3.
(b) Routine Maintenance. Routine sign maintenance including cleaning, re-painting, replacing lamps and ballast
and electrical components and changing of lettering or parts of signs designed to be regularly changed.
13-16.3 State Permit
In addition to the Zoning Certificate and permits required pursuant to this Section, a state permit issued by
the State Director of Transportation may also be required prior to issuance of any Final Zoning Inspection
Certificate for outdoor advertising signs located within 660 feet of streets that are part of the interstate or
primary highway systems pursuant to Chapter 5516 of the Ohio Revised Code.
13-16.4 Standards for Billboards
(a) Temporary Enlargements. The use of cut-outs, extensions and embellishments is expressly prohibited.
(b) Location. No off-site advertising sign shall be constructed:
(1) as a roof sign;
(2) as a double-faced, side-by-side, stacked, or decked sign with a combined sign face area of more than
150 square feet;
(3) with a face area exceeding 14 feet in height x 48 feet in length (672 square feet), excluding temporary
cut-outs, extensions, and embellishments permitted as set forth herein;
(4) within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of any street or highway;
(5) as a ground sign more than 40 feet above the grade of the lot or location being occupied by such sign, or
the average natural grade at the sign location, if higher. In the case of a street or highway which is
higher than the grade of the lot or location to be occupied by the sign, the height shall be measured from
the center line of pavement at such location, but in no event shall the height exceed forty feet above the
center line of the pavement at that location.
13-16.5 General Spacing
An affidavit certifying compliance with the spacing requirements stated below must be provided by the
applicant. Measurement shall be computed along the edge of pavement of the thoroughfare from which the
sign is intended to be viewed beginning at a point perpendicular to the off-site advertising sign and
measured along the edge of pavement of all intersecting thoroughfares.
(a) Expressways and Freeways. No off-site advertising sign shall be constructed within 2,600 feet of any other
off-site advertising sign located on either side of the highway (specifically I-71, I-275, Ronald Reagan Cross
County Highway and other highways designated as expressways or freeways on the Thoroughfare Plan of
Hamilton County) and facing the same traffic flow.
(b) Major Arterial Roadways. No off-site advertising sign shall be constructed within 2,600 feet of any other
off-site advertising sign located on either side of the highway (Major Arterials designated on the
Thoroughfare Plan of Hamilton County) and facing the same traffic flow, provided however that Bulletin
spacing shall be not less than 2,600 feet from Bulletin Billboard sign to Bulletin Billboard sign located on
either side of the highway and facing the same traffic flow.
(c) Minor Arterial Roadways and Collector Streets. Poster signs and Junior Panels shall be spaced not less than
2,600 feet from another off-site advertising sign located on either side of the highway (Minor Arterials and
Collectors designated on the Thoroughfare Plan of Hamilton County) and facing the same traffic flow.
13-16.6 Buffer Spacing
An affidavit certifying compliance with the spacing requirements stated below must be provided by the
applicant. Measurement shall be computed along the edge of pavement of the thoroughfare from which the
sign is intended to be viewed beginning at a point perpendicular to the off-site advertising sign and
measured along the edge of pavement of all intersecting thoroughfares.
(a) Distance from Residences. No off-site advertising sign shall be located within 2,600 feet of any parcel
located in any residential district or recorded residential subdivision.
(b) Distance from Special Facilities. No off-site advertising sign shall be located within 1,500 feet of any park,
natural preserve, scenic roadway, school, cemetery, historic site or area, hospital, retirement home or
government building.
(c) Distance from Scenic and Historic Areas. No off-site advertising sign shall be located within 1,500 feet of a
tunnel, bridge, underpass or overpass if such structure is immediately adjacent to a Scenic Roadway or
Historic Site or Area.
(d) Location of Advertising for Tobacco and Alcohol Products. No off-site advertising sign advertising any
tobacco product or alcoholic beverage, whether constructed prior to or since the adoption of this Resolution,
shall be located within 1,500 feet in any direction of any school, hospital, retirement home, cemetery,
religious institution or park.
13-17 ENFORCEMENT
13-17.1 Violations
(a) Failure to Obtain Required Zoning Certificate or Permits. Any person who erects, alters or moves any sign
for which a Zoning Certificate or permit is required after the effective date of this Chapter shall be deemed in
violation of this Zoning Resolution subject to the procedures and penalties described in Chapter 24 of this
Resolution.
(b) Continuing Violations. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
13-17.2 Penalties for Violations
Penalties shall be imposed pursuant to Chapter 24 of this Zoning Resolution.
13-17.3 Revocation of Zoning Certificate/Sign
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Chapter 13 are mere licenses, revocable by
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) Time Limit and Options. A person or entity assessed of a penalty pursuant to Chapter 24 must select
one of the following options within thirty (30) days after receipt of the citation:
(1) Abatement of the violation and tender to the Administrative Official full payment of the civil
penalty for each day that any violation continues receipt of citation; or
(2) Submit in writing to the Administrative Official a request for an administrative hearing before the
Board of Zoning Appeals specifying the factual or legal issues to be contested. Timely
submission of such request shall abate the imposition of any penalty.
(b) Effect of Administrative Hearing. If the alleged violator requests an administrative hearing, no further
demand for payment will be made by the Administrative Official unless a final decision is made by the
Board of Zoning Appeals which upholds the assessment of a penalty. An administrative hearing
before the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to the Rules of Procedure for the
Board.
(c) Appeal. Any person or entity who is aggrieved by a final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County.
(d) Fee. A fee equal to double that required by Section 20-1.3 shall be charged for Zoning Certificates
issued pursuant to Section 13-4 following the location, construction, re-construction, enlargement,
structural alteration or changing the sign without obtaining a zoning certificate.
CHAPTER 13
BUFFER YARDS AND RESOURCE PROTECTION
14-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to require buffering between noncompatible land uses, provide coordinated
streetscapes, protect sight triangles, and to protect, preserve and promote the character and value of surrounding
neighborhoods as well as, to promote the public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air
pollution, visual pollution, air temperature, and artificial light glare by providing for the installation and
maintenance of buffer areas and landscaping in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth below.
14-2 APPLICABILITY
No structure on land which abuts a right-of-way or boundary between two Land Use Classes as defined in
Table 14A shall be developed, or redeveloped, unless a buffer yard, if required as indicated in Table 14B, is
established in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
14-3 TYPES OF BUFFER YARDS
The following types of buffer yards shall be required, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter or other related chapter.
14-3.1 Boundary Buffer
The purpose of the boundary buffer is to separate adjacent land uses and screen and soften the detrimental
impacts of such uses upon one another and upon the surrounding neighborhood. The boundary buffer,
which is a linear area adjacent to the side and/or rear property line, may vary in width depending on site
conditions and on the level of screening required for line of sight, noise suppression or other nuisance
related purpose.
14-3.2 Streetscape Buffer
A streetscape buffer is located in a linear area adjacent to the front property line extending from side lotline
to side lot-line. The purpose of the streetscape buffer is to shield or enhance views into the parking lot,
establish coordination among diverse buildings, setbacks and uses, to define the street and access points, to
retain the quality of the environment by providing appropriate vertical mass in keeping with dimensions of
horizontal voids, and to diminish the presence of wires/poles.
14-4 PLAN REVIEW
For any buffer required by this Chapter, a plan shall be submitted with the application for Zoning Certificate to the
Administrative Official to review for compliance with these regulations and any other applicable regulations. The
plan shall show:
(a) the topography of the site;
(b) the location of driveway entrances;
(c) provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
(d) the location of sidewalks on or adjacent to the property;
(e) the location of utilities, barriers, shelters, and signs;
(f) the location of landscaped areas and the types, quantity, sizes and location of vegetation to be planted in the areas of
existing vegetation and existing and proposed topography and
(g) any other relevant information requested by the Administrative Official.
14-5 MODIFICATIONS AND WAIVERS
In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site, the size of the parcel to be developed,
the extent of expansion or redevelopment of the site or parking area is deemed to be insignificant, or the presence of
existing buffers on adjacent developed property would make strict adherence to the requirements of this Chapter
serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install and maintain the required buffer, the
Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals (per Section 14-5.1) may, upon proper
application by the property owner, and upon making findings of fact, modify and/or waive the requirements of this
Chapter provided the existing or resulting boundary features of the development site comply with the spirit and
intent of this Chapter, Chapter 12, Section 12-6 and other related chapters.
14-5.1 Authority
The authority to approve landscape modifications resides with the Commission or Board that approves
each specific type of zoning request.
14-6 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR BUFFER YARDS
14-6.1 Responsibility for Installation of Buffer
The boundary buffer area shall be provided by the person in charge of or in control of developing the
property whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise (hereinafter referred to as "Owner").
14-6.2 Location
Boundary buffers shall be located along the rear and side boundaries of a lot or parcel. On sloped areas the
boundary buffer should be located to maximize its screening effectiveness. Streetscape buffers shall be
located along the public right-of-way and may be required along private street easements.
14-6.3 Structures within Required Buffer
No structure shall be permitted within a required buffer other than a wall, fence or berm, or a driveway in
the front yard connecting a parking area on the lot to the street or to a parking area on an abutting lot. A
driveway in the side yard that connects a paving area on the lot to the street shall not encroach into the
boundary buffer area.
14-6.4 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Same Owner
When both parcels are owned and being developed by the same owner, the buffer may be placed on either
adjoining parcel or astride the boundary.
14-6.5 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Different Owners
When adjoining parcels have different owners the buffer shall be placed on the parcel being developed.
However, a buffer that meets the requirement of both parcels may be placed astride the boundary if a
written agreement, signed by both owners, is filed with the Administrative Official, is recorded in the real
property records of the County and runs with the property.
14-6.6 Existing Fence, Wall Berm or Landscaping on Adjacent Parcel
When the adjoining parcel has an existing fence, wall, berm, or landscaping within ten feet (10') of a
developing parcel boundary that fulfills the buffer requirements of the developing parcel, the existing
landscape material on the adjacent lot may be used towards the requirement for the boundary buffer
required for that boundary edge only. All credits for existing landscape material must be in accordance
with Section 15-6, and other related chapters. Any additional landscape material necessary to meet the
boundary buffer requirements shall be added.
14-6.7 Existing Development on Both Sides
Where development already exists on both sides of a property line, a buffer shall be established as a
condition of any new development. The property owner shall provide the maximum buffer possible under
the standards of this Chapter given the location of existing buildings and driveways. If the width available
for the buffer is less than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required buffer width, then a solid fence or
wall meeting the standards of Chapter 15, Section 15-2, shall be located at the side of the buffer facing the
proposed development.
14-7 BOUNDARY BUFFER
To determine the type of boundary buffer required between two adjacent parcels, the following procedure and
standards shall be utilized:
14-7.1 Procedure
(a) Identify the Land Use Class of the Developing Parcel. Refer to Table 14A to determine the Land Use Class
of the proposed use and intensity.
(b) Identify the Land Use Class of each Adjoining Parcel. Refer to Table 14A to determine the Land Use Class
of the adjoining use and intensity.
(c) Determine the Boundary Buffer Requirement for each Edge of the Developing Parcel. Refer to Table 14B
and determine what the Boundary Buffer Requirement will be. Figure 14A indicates Landscape Material
Requirements for Boundary Buffer A.
(d) Determine Width of Buffer. For each Boundary Buffer, alternative widths may be utilized. The width of
each buffer defines the Landscape Material Requirements. For each width range, options for Landscape
Material Requirements are given as minimum number of plants required per one hundred (100) linear feet.
(e) Determine Length of Buffer. Measure the length of the property boundary requiring the buffer and subtract
any length covered completely by a clear sight triangle under Section 14 -9.
(f) Determine Landscape Material Requirements. Divide the length of the Required Boundary Buffer (the result
of 14-7.1(e) above) by one hundred (100). Multiply the result by the number of plants for the required
boundary buffer shown in Figure 14A for the selected width. Any fractional number of plants (shrubs and
trees) should be calculated to the next highest whole number.
(g) Location and Placement of Landscape Material Requirements. All landscape material requirements shall
remain within the designated area and shall otherwise meet the standards of the Boundary Buffer. Although
landscape material requirements typically are located within each 100 foot increment, their placement may
vary in order to screen objectionable views.
FIGURE 14A: ALTERNATIVES FOR BOUNDARY BUFFER A
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
10 ft. 5 15
15 ft. 4.5 10
20 ft. 3 8.5
25 ft. 2 7
Notes:
1. Two (2) under story trees or two (2) evergreen trees may be substituted for 1 canopy tree for up to 25% of the required
canopy trees.
2. Per staff determination - a fence, wall, or berm 3 ft. to 6 ft. in height may be used and can substitute for shrub
requirements.
3. All landscape material required for the buffer shall be confined to within the boundary buffer.
TABLE 14A
CLASSIFICATION OF LAND USES
LAND USE
LAND USE INTENSITY1
(See note below if intensity of
adjoining parcel is unknown)
LAND
USE
RESIDENTIAL
Single Family Detached and Detached in PUD’s Maximum 7.26 DU/A LOW I
Multi-Family Maximum 7.26 DU/A LOW II
Maximum 9.7 DU/A MOD II
GREATER THAN 9.7DU/A HIGH III
COMMERCIAL
Office Maximum .50 ISR LOW II
Maximum .65 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .65 ISR HIGH IV
Retail Business (Sales and Service) Maximum .50 ISR LOW III
Maximum .65 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .65 ISR HIGH IV
INDUSTRIAL
Light Industry Maximum .50 ISR LOW III
Maximum .65 ISR MOD IV
GREATER THAN .65 ISR HIGH IV
INSTITUTIONAL; PUBLIC SERVICE; AND RECREATION, CULTURE & ENTERTAINMENT
Maximum .50 ISR LOW II
Maximum .65 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .65 ISR HIGH IV
AGRICULTURAL
Rural LOW I
Suburban LOW I
NOTES:
ISR = IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO
DU/A = DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE
1The land use class of a developed adjoining parcel shall be classified as low intensity if the impervious surface (ISR) is
not known.
The land use class of a vacant adjoining parcel shall be classified as low intensity for the use typically permitted in the
existing zone district.
TABLE 14B
MINIMUM BUFFER YARDS FOR ADJOINING LAND USE*
LAND USE CLASS OF ADJOINING PARCEL
LAND USE CLASS OF
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL I II III IV V Adjoining
R.O.W.
I A*** A A A A C**
II A A A A A C
III A + 10 ft. A A A A C
IV A + 40 ft. A + 30 ft. A + 20 ft. A A C
V A + 50 ft. A + 40 ft. A + 30 ft. A + 20 ft. A C
NOTES:
Each 20 foot increment required in Land Use Class IV and Land Use Class V can be substituted by an additional contiguous "B"
Buffer strip.
Each 10 feet increment required in Land Use Class IV and Land Use Class V can be substituted by an additional contiguous "A"
Buffer strip.
*Greater boundary buffers may be required in approvals of Conditional Uses and PUD's when necessary to protect adjacent land
uses.
**Only required in Land Use Class I if parking area for 5 or more vehicles is within 50 feet of the R.O.W.
***Boundary buffer not required on adjoining single family residential parcels.
Buffer Yards:
A = Boundary buffer requirements in Figure 14A
B = Intentionally Omitted
C = Streetscape buffer requirements in Figure 14C
14-7.2 Overlap
When any portion of the parcel is subject to more than one set of landscape requirements as set forth in this
Chapter, Chapter 12, and other related chapters, the most stringent requirement will control. The most
stringent requirements shall be defined as those which require the highest fence, wall or screen or, if no
fence, wall or screen is required, the requirements with the greatest quantity of landscaping.
14-7.3 Credit
Existing vegetation, fences, walls or berms on a parcel may be counted toward the requirements for any
class of buffer provided that it meets the standards established in Chapter 15, Section 15-6, and Credit for
Existing Landscape Materials.
14-8 STREETSCAPE BUFFER
All parcels with Land Use Classes II through V, as defined in Table 14A, with frontage on a public road and all
parking areas in Class I for 5 or more vehicles (in all Land Use Classes) within 50 feet of the right-of-way shall
provide a streetscape buffer along the property line abutting the right-of-way of the public road when developed or
redeveloped.
14-8.1 General Standards
(a) Location and Depth. The streetscape buffer shall have a depth of ten feet (10') or greater, shall be located
adjacent to the right-of-way and shall extend along the entire road frontage.
(b) Parking Prohibited. No parking or pavement shall be allowed in the streetscape buffer except for intersecting
drives or required walkways.
(c) Specifications. Landscape Material shall be required in accordance with Figure 14C and Chapter 15,
General Landscape Material Standards.
(d) Sight Triangle. When in a sight triangle, all Landscape Material shall meet the standards set forth in
Section 14-9.
14-8.2 Determination of Streetscape Buffer Requirements
To determine the required landscape materials the following procedure shall be followed:
(a) Determine Width of Buffer. Although the width of the buffer is typically measured parallel to the
property line, design variations are allowed. The width of each streetscape buffer defines the
landscape material requirements and, for each width range, options for landscape material
requirements are given as minimum number of plants required per one hundred (100) linear feet.
(b) Determine Length of Buffer. Measure the length along the street right-of-way, which requires the
buffer, and subtract any length covered by a clear sight triangle under Section 14-9.
(c) Determine Landscape Material Requirements. Divide the length of the required boundary buffer
(the result of 14-8.2 (b) above) by one hundred (100). Multiply the result by the number of plants
for the required boundary buffer shown in Figure 14C for the selected width and type of use. Any
fractional number of plants (shrubs and trees) should be calculated to the next highest whole
number.
(d) Location and Placement of Landscape Material Requirements. All landscape material
requirements shall remain within the streetscape buffer area or in the vehicular use area where
such area abuts the streetscape strip and shall otherwise meet the standards of the streetscape
buffer. Although landscape material requirements typically are located within each 100 foot
increment, their placement may vary in order to screen objectionable views.
FIGURE 14C: STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
ALTERNATIVES FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
10 ft. 3.3 10
15 ft. 2.8 8
20 ft. 2.3 6.5
25 ft. 1.9 5
Notes:
1. 1.5 under story trees or 1 evergreen tree may be substituted for 1 canopy tree for up to 50% of the required canopy trees.
2. A fence, wall, or berm 3 ft. to 6 ft. in height may be used and can substitute for shrub requirements.
3. All landscape material required for the buffer shall be confined to within the required landscape strip.
4. One canopy tree may substitute for 3 shrubs up to 50% of the shrub requirements.
ALTERNATIVES FOR OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
OPTION 1
10 ft. 2.5 20
OPTION 2
20 ft.
Average
(range 10 to
30 ft.)
5
(or existing
woodland
area)
Notes:
1. Berms shall be a minimum 3 ft. height.
2. A fence or wall 3 ft. to 4 ft. in height with 50% or less of its surface open or a minimum 3 ft. grade drop from the right-ofway
to the vehicular use area may be used and can be substituted for 50% of the shrub requirements.
3. All landscape material required for the buffer shall be confined to within the required landscape strip.
ALTERNATIVES FOR RETAIL STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Maximum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
OPTION 1
10 ft. 1.5 20
OPTION 2
20 ft.
Average
(range 10 to
30 ft.)
2.5
(or existing
woodland
area)
Notes:
1. Berms shall be a minimum 3 ft. height.
2. A fence or wall 3 ft. to 4 ft. in height with 50% or less of its surface open or a minimum 3 ft. grade drop from the right-ofway
to the vehicular use area may be used and can be substituted for 50% of the shrub requirements.
3. All landscape material required for the buffer shall be confined to within the required landscape strip.
14-9 CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE AT STREET AND ACCESS DRIVE
INTERSECTIONS
14-9.1 Purpose
To insure that landscape materials do not constitute a driving hazard, a "clear sight triangle" will be
observed at all street and access drive intersections.
14-9.2 Definition
A clear sight triangle is the triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on
intersecting lines of a right-of-way, easement of access, or pavement edge of an access drive, each point
being 20 feet from the intersecting lines. See Figure 14D.
14-9.3 Design
The entire area of the clear sight triangle should be designed as illustrated in Figure 14D to provide the
driver of the vehicle entering the intersection with an unobstructed view to all points nine (9) feet above
the roadway along the centerline. The recommended distance depends upon the design speed of the
higher-order street and therefore is greater for arterial streets than for collectors.
14-9.4 Restrictions within Clear Sight Triangles
(a) Within the sight triangle no landscape material with a mature height greater than twelve inches (12")
shall be permitted with the exception of trees which conform to the following standards. Trees shall
be permitted within the sight triangles as long as, except during early growth stages, only the tree trunk
(no limbs, leaves, etc.) is visible between the ground and nine (9) feet above the ground, or otherwise
does not present a traffic visibility hazard. Restrictions shall not apply to the following:
(1) Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise twelve (12) or more inches
above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection;
(2) Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental signs, and traffic control devices.
(b) The restrictions contained in this Section 14-9.4 shall also apply to any areas outside the clear sight
distance triangle that fall within the sight distance requirements of the County Engineer.
FIGURE 14D
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
14-10 WOODLAND PRESERVATION
To be eligible for landscape requirement credits the following criteria must be met:
14-10.1 Quantity of Woodland
The minimum amount of woodland preserved shall be one-eighth of an acre (5,445 sq. ft.). The woodland
canopy shall be contiguous and fifty percent (50%) of the canopy shall be from trees that have an 18" DBH
or greater.
14-10.2 Location
Any woodland area eligible for credit must be located within one hundred feet (100') of the principal
building or an impervious surface that directly serves the principal use on the site and physically located
within a required buffer area.
14-10.3 Credit
If the above conditions are met, credit may be granted as follows:
(a) Landscape Reduction Bonus. The landscape requirements, specified in this and other related chapters, that
are applicable to the site may be reduced or eliminated upon the determination by the Administrative Official
that the Woodland Preservation area amenities fully compensate for the reduced or eliminated landscape
requirements.
(b) Parking Reduction Bonus. The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission may approve a reduction of up to
ten percent (10%) of the required number of parking spaces if adequate parking will remain on the subject
site and if land area for required number of spaces remains available for future development on the subject
site.
(c) Intensity Reduction Bonus. The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission may approve an increase in the
intensity (maximum ISR) up to ten percent (10%) of the district limits for any use permissible as a PUD.
14-11 RIPARIAN BUFFER AREA
The purpose of this area is to retain existing forested areas along streams and rivers in order to reduce erosion and
pollution, preserve stability of channels, retard runoff, maintain suitable water temperature for aquatic life, to
maintain scenic integrity and provide a natural environment that benefits people and wildlife.
14-11.1 Buffer Requirements
(a) A minimum 120 foot wide forested buffer strip should be maintained along all streams and rivers designated
as part of the State Scenic Rivers System and along related bikeways.
(b) A minimum 50 foot wide forested buffer strip should be maintained along all streams and rivers not included
in the State Scenic Rivers System and along related bikeways.
14-11.2 Credit
In consideration of compliance with buffer requirements, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
may, upon proper application through the Administrative Official, reduce or eliminate the landscape
requirements specified in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
CHAPTER 15
GENERAL LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS
15-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that, in conjunction with the purposes of Chapters 12, 14, and other related
chapters all landscape requirements of this Resolution are effectively achieved with high quality landscape elements
and to provide flexibility and incentives to retain existing landscape material elements where appropriate.
15-2 STANDARDS FOR USE OF WALLS, FENCES OR BERMS
Whenever a landscape material requirement in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters, includes a wall, fence or
berm, such wall, fence or berm shall meet the following requirements:
15-2.1 Walls
Any wall shall be constructed to be durable, in brick, stone or other masonry materials, with fifty percent
(50%) or less of the wall surface left open.
15-2.2 Fences
Any fence shall be constructed to be durable, of wood, metal or wrought iron. Fence posts shall be
structurally stable. The finished side of the fence shall face out from the developing property and shall
face the adjacent property or street. Chain link fencing may not be used to meet the requirements of
Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
15-2.3 Berms
Berms shall be physical barriers made of earth which block or screen the view similar to a hedge, fence, or
wall. In no event shall a berm have a slope of greater than 3:1 (three feet of horizontal distance for each
one foot rise in elevation). Any berm shall be stabilized to prevent erosion immediately after its
construction and shall be landscaped within the next planting season in accordance with the landscaping
requirements in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
15-2.4 Relationship of Plant Material with Wall or Fence
(a) Where a wall or fence which is 50% or less open is used as part of a landscaping requirement, all of the
required plantings accompanying the wall or fence shall be located between the wall or fence and the
adjacent property of the lowest intensity use.
(b) Where a fence is 50% or more open, as in a wrought iron type fence, the shrub requirement shall be
increased by 25% (multiply the required quantity by 1.25). When a fence is 50% or more open, the required
plantings accompanying the fence may be located on either side of the fence provided that at least 50% (by
quantity) of the shrub requirement is on the street side or the side of the adjacent property of less intensity.
Trees may be placed on either side of the fence.
15-3 PLANT INSTALLATION STANDARDS
The following standards shall apply to all new plant material installed as part of a buffer required under the
provisions of Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
15-3.1 Species of Plant Material
To meet the requirements of Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters, plants shall be species listed in the
Appendix 2 entitled, Recommended Plant Material List or shall be otherwise approved as appropriate for
this region by a licensed Landscape Architect or Certified Horticulturist.
15-3.2 Quality and Installation
(a) All specifications for the quality and installation of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with the most
recent edition of "American Standards for Nursery Stock" published by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(b) All plant material shall be free from disease and damage.
(c) All plant material shall be planted in a manner that is not intrusive to utilities, pavement, pedestrian traffic or
vehicular traffic.
(d) All required plant material shall be planted within one year or by the next planting season, as outlined in the
latest edition of “American Standards for Nursery Stock”, after all construction activity in the area of the new
planting has ceased.
15-3.3 Size
(a) Canopy Trees shall be deciduous trees with a minimum of twelve feet (12') overall height or a minimum
caliper of 2 1/2 inches when installed, and have an expected height of at least 35 feet at maturity.
(b) Evergreen Trees shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height when installed.
(c) Under story Trees shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height in clump form or 1-½" caliper in single stem
form when installed.
(d) Shrubs shall be at least eighteen inches (18") in height or twenty-four inches (24") in spread when installed.
15-4 SCREENS
The objective of providing a screen is to visually hide whatever is behind the screen. The screen shall be 100%
opaque. The following standards for each screening material shall be required:
15-4.1 Plant Material Height Requirements
When plant material is used as screening it shall meet all height requirements in accordance with
Chapters 12 and 14. Height requirements will be considered met when plants are selected whose height at
maturity meet the required height as indicated on the list in the Appendix 2 entitled, Recommended Plant
Material List or as certified by a licensed Landscape Architect or Certified Horticulturist.
15-4.2 Planting Requirements
To be counted towards screening requirements, evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs shall be planted close
enough to fulfill the objective as defined in Section 15-4. Recommended spacing to achieve this is as
follows:
(a) Spreading evergreen trees should be planted eight feet (8') on center. Narrow evergreen trees should be
planted four feet (4') on center. Designation of evergreen trees as spreading or narrow shall be certified by a
licensed Landscape Architect or certified Horticulturist.
(b) Evergreen shrubs should be planted at a maximum of 4’ on center.
15-4.3 Combination of Materials
Plant material may be used in conjunction with fences, walls and berms but the overall effect shall be a
continuous 100% opaque screen at maturity. Plants may be planted in rows or be staggered, but the overall
effect shall be a 100% opaque screen.
15-4.4 Approved Plant List
Plant materials used shall be on the list in Appendix 2 or shall be equivalent to plants on the list as certified
by a licensed Landscape Architect or certified Horticulturist.
15-5 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALL LANDSCAPE MATERIALS
All landscape material must be properly maintained in order for the buffer or screen to fulfill its purpose. The
owner of the property and any tenant on the property where required landscaping is located shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscape materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions
necessary to keep plantings healthy and orderly in appearance and to keep walls, fences and berms in good repair
and neat appearance.
Any landscape material which fails to meet the minimum requirements of this Section at the time of installation
shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced
within one year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first. All buffer materials shall be protected from
damage by motor vehicles or pedestrians, which could reduce the effectiveness of the buffer.
15-6 CREDIT FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPE MATERIALS
The intent of this Section is to provide for the opportunity to protect and preserve existing woodlands and
established plant material.
15-6.1 Trees
Credit may be given for existing Canopy Trees, Evergreen Trees and Understory Trees as follows:
(a) Existing healthy trees may be preserved and used to fulfill landscape requirements for any required planting
provided they are in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter and in Chapters 12, 14, and other
related chapters.
(b) Trees may be credited only one time towards any one buffer, screen or other landscape requirements set forth
in this Chapter and in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters. Trees must be located within the required
landscape area to which it will be credited.
(c) Trees which conform to these standards and are proposed to be used for credit shall generally have location,
species, and caliper or height indicated on the required landscape plan.
(d) Trees shall be credited according to the following criteria in the quantities shown:
Minimum
Caliper
Minimum
Surrounding
Landscape Area
Minimum
width of
Landscape area
Number of
Trees Credited
36” or greater 350 sf 15 ft. 7
26 - 36” 300 sf 15 ft 5
13 - 25” 250 sf 10 ft 3
4 - 12” 150 sf 5 ft 2
2 - ½” 100 sf 5 ft 1
(e) To be credited, a tree must have the minimum landscape area surrounding the tree according to 15-6.1(d)
above or the area of the drip line of the tree, whichever is greater. The surrounding landscape area required
for each credited tree may overlap the surrounding landscape area required by other existing trees to be
credited by 50% of the required area. The surrounding landscape area shall be undisturbed land.
(f) If any preserved tree dies, one tree shall be replaced for each tree credited against such a preserved tree. The
required landscape plan shall indicate the quantities of trees credited and the location of the surrounding
landscape area for each tree credited.
(g) 15-6.2 Shrubs.
Shrubs may be credited on a one to one basis towards landscape material requirements if the following
criteria are met:
(a) Existing healthy shrubs may be used to fulfill landscape requirements for any required planting provided they
conform to the standards set forth in this Chapter and in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
(b) Shrubs may be credited only one time towards any one buffer, screen or other landscape requirement.
Shrubs must be located within the required area for the buffer or screen to which it will be credited.
(c) Shrubs which conform to these standards and are proposed to be used for credit shall have location, species,
and height indicated on the required landscape plan.
(d) If any shrub used for credit dies, one shrub shall be replaced for each shrub credited to that shrub.
15-6.3 Protection during Construction
If trees or shrubs are to be credited towards landscaping requirements they shall be protected during all
phases of construction as follows:
(a) Prior to any site demolition, or grading, barriers shall be constructed around existing trees and shrubs to be
preserved.
(1) Barriers around trees to be preserved shall include the minimum of surrounding landscape area as
required by Section 15-6.1(d) or the area under the drip line of the tree whichever is greater.
(2) Barriers around shrubs to be preserved shall include the area within three feet of the shrub mass.
(3) When large machinery is to be used on the site, these barriers shall be sturdy fences or a similar barrier
and shall be made more visible by high visibility orange paint or construction flagging. When large
machinery is not to be on site, high visibility construction flagging or similar device shall clearly
delineate the protected area.
(b) The following activities are prohibited during demolition and construction under tree canopies and within
any areas enclosed by protective fencing as required by this section:
(1) Placing backfill or storing material;
(2) Construction equipment;
(3) Changing site grades within the drip line of trees or within three feet (3') of shrubs or changing site
grades so that drainage flows into or collects near protected trees or shrubs;
(4) All other construction activity not previously mentioned.
15-6.4 Credit for Fences, Walls, and Berms
(a) Fences, walls, and berms may be credited towards fulfilling any landscape material requirements provided
they conform to the standards set forth in this Chapter and Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
(b) All fences, walls and berms may be credited only one time towards any one buffer or screen requirement.
All such fences, walls and berms must be located within the required area for the buffer or screen to which it
will be credited.
CHAPTER 16
AMENDMENTS
16-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards and procedures for making amendments to the text of this
Zoning Resolution and the Zoning Map. The amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor
to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make adjustments of general significance or
application that are necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy.
16-2 AUTHORITY
The text of this Zoning Resolution and the Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the passage of a
resolution duly adopted by the Board of Township Trustees in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
Chapter.
16-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS
An amendment to the text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map may be initiated by motion of the
Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, by passage of a resolution by the Board of Township Trustees that is
certified by the Board to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, or by the filing of an application with the
Sycamore Township Zoning Commission by one or more of the owners or lessees of property located within the
area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed amendment. Specific Plan Districts may be initiated only
by the filing of an application with the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission by the owner of the property
proposed to be changed by the proposed amendment.
16-4 STANDARDS FOR AMENDMENTS
The decision of the Board of Township Trustees to amend the text of the Zoning Resolution or to amend the Zoning
Map is within the sound legislative discretion of the Board. As a part of the review by the Board, for any
amendment to the text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map, the following factors, where applicable,
should be considered:
(a) The recommendations of the professional planning and zoning staff of Sycamore Township, and the Zoning
Commission.
(b) The reports submitted by reviewing governmental agencies.
(c) The comments received at the public hearing concerning the proposed amendment.
(d) The relationship to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(e) Compatibility with the goals and objectives, if any, of adopted plans for land use, transportation, utilities, community
facilities and other plan elements and with adopted objectives and policies related to land use.
(f) The economic viability of the proposed district.
(g) The location of the subject property and the compatibility of the proposed use with the character of the area.
(h) The existing and proposed site features of the subject property.
16-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS – PUBLIC MEETINGS AND
HEARINGS REQUIRED
16-5.1 Public Prehearing Conference
(a) Purpose and Scope. The prehearing conference and open house is required prior to the filing of an
application. The conference is intended to help minimize development planning costs, avoid
misinterpretation, facilitate effective and timely public information and input through study, discussion,
communication, comments and findings from interested parties, assure awareness of local plans and issues
and determine the potential for full compliance with all requirements for zoning amendments.
(b) Procedure. A prehearing conference and open house shall be scheduled and conducted by the
Administrative Official within fourteen (14) working days following receipt of the request for a conference.
(c) Notice. Notice of prehearing conferences shall be transmitted by the Administrative Official to the applicant,
township trustees, applicable departments and agencies adjoining property owners and other affected parties
at least ten (10) days prior to the conference.
16-5.2 Application
An applicant for a zone amendment shall file an application on a form or forms provided by the
Administrative Official. The application is not considered officially submitted until the Administrative
Official has reviewed the submission for technical completeness.
16-5.3 Schedule of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Meeting and
Zoning Commission Hearing
Within five (5) days after the adoption of a motion by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission,
certification of resolution by the Board of Township Trustees or the acceptance of an application
determined to be complete pursuant to Chapter 20, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission shall:
(a) transmit a copy, together with the related text and map changes, to the Hamilton County Regional Planning
Commission.
(b) set a date for a public hearing not less than twenty (20) days from the date of initiation of the amendment by
motion, certification or the filing of an application and provide notice of such hearing pursuant to Section 16-
7.
16-5.4 Staff Recommendation
Within thirty (30) days of the acceptance of any application for development approval determined to be
complete pursuant to Chapter 20, the Administrative Official shall forward a written advisory staff report
to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission recommending approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval. The advisory staff report shall include:
(a) A summary of comments and concerns of applicable departments, agencies and officials;
(b) The standards and criteria used in evaluating the application pursuant to Section 16-4;
(c) The reasons for the recommendation;
(d) The actions or modifications, if any, that may be necessary to obtain approval in accordance with regulations
and adopted community plans.
16-5.5 Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Recommendation
The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after their public hearing
recommend the approval or denial of the proposed amendment, or the approval of some modification of the
amendment pursuant to the standards in Section 16-4. The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission shall
then submit its recommendation together with the proposed text and map changes to the Board of
Township Trustees.
16-5.6 Board of Township Trustees Action
(a) Schedule of Hearing. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission, the Board of Township Trustees shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days in
accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 16-7.
(b) Decision. Within twenty (20) days after the public hearing, the Board shall either adopt or deny the
recommendation of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or adopt some modification of the
recommendation by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission. In making its decision, the Board shall
consider the factors contained in Section 16-4. In the event the Board denies or modifies the
recommendation of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, the unanimous vote of the Board shall be
required.
(c) Effective Date. An amendment adopted by the Board of Township Trustees shall become effective in thirty
(30) days after the date of adoption unless within that time period a petition for zoning referendum is
presented in accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code and section 16-6.1
(d) See Apprendix 4 for form requirements.
16-6 REFERENDUM
16-6.1 Petition Time Limit
Within thirty (30) days after the date of adoption of an amendment by the Board, a petition may be
presented to the Board of Township Trustees requesting that the Board submit the amendment to the
electors of that area, for approval or rejection, at a special election to be held on the day of the next primary
or general election.
16-6.2 Petition Signatures
The petition must be signed by the number of qualified voters residing in the township or part thereof
included in the zoning plan equal to not less than eight percent (8%) of the total vote cast for all candidates
for governor in such area at the last preceding general election at which the governor was elected.
16-6.3 Petition Content
Each part of the petition for zoning referendum shall contain the number and full and correct title, if any, of
the zoning amendment resolution, motion or application, as the case may be, furnishing the name by which
the amendment proposal is known and a brief summary of its contents. Each petition and Statement of the
Circulator shall, in addition, conform to the rules specified in Section 3501.38 of the Ohio Revised Code as
shown in Appendix 4.
16.6-4 Effect of Referendum
No amendment for which a referendum vote has been requested shall be put into effect unless a majority of
the vote cast on the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon certification by the board of elections that
the amendment has been approved by the voters, it shall take effect immediately.
16-7 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
An amendment to the text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map, initiated by any one of the three methods
described in Section 16-3, shall require notification of required public hearings in accordance with the following
procedures.
16-7.1 Published Notice
Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or Board of
Township Trustees, as the case may be, by one publication in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in Sycamore Township at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing.
16-7.2 Mailed Notice
The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or the Township Trustees, as the case may be, shall provide
notice for map and text amendments according to the following situations. When the proposed zone map
amendment involves the rezoning or redistricting of ten (10) or fewer parcels of land, as listed on the
county auditor’s current tax list, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before
the date of the public hearing. That notice shall be mailed to all owners of property within, contiguous to,
directly across from, and within two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted.
When the proposed zone map amendment involves the rezoning or redistricting of more than 10 parcels of
land as listed on the county auditor’s current tax list, or when a text amendment is proposed, the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission shall determine on a case-by-case basis the extent and method to which
additional notice is necessary beyond general notice as required in Section 16-7.1.
16-7.3 Content of Published and Mailed Notices
Published and mailed notices shall contain the time, date, and place of the public hearing. In addition, they
shall include all of the following information:
(a) A statement indicating that the motion, resolution, or application is an amendment to the Zoning Resolution;
(b) The nature of the proposed amendment;
(c) The current and proposed zoning classification of the property named in the proposed amendment;
(d) The time and place where the motion, resolution, or application proposing to amend the Zoning Resolution
will be available for examination for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing;
(e) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by publication or by mail, or by
both publication and mail;
A statement that after the conclusion of the hearing the matter will be submitted to the Board of Township
Trustees for its action.
16-8 APPEAL OF DECISION
Any party adversely affected by the decision of the Board of Township Trustees or by the Effect of Referendum
may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable
or unlawful.
CHAPTER 17
CONDITIONAL USES
17-1 PURPOSE
Conditional uses are those uses having some special impact or uniqueness which require a careful review of their
location, design, configuration and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the desirability of
permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular
location depending on a weighing, in each case, of the public benefit against the local impact, the amelioration of
any adverse impacts through special site planning, and development techniques and contributions to the provision of
public improvements and rights-of-way.
17-2 AUTHORITY
The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Chapter, and
other regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is located, approve by resolution those uses
listed as conditional uses in the Table in Section 17-12, in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3, or in any
other part of this Resolution.
17-3 EFFECT OF CONDITIONAL USE LISTING
17-3.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements
The listing of a conditional use in the Table in Section 17-12, in a Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3,
or in any other part of this Resolution does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such conditional
use will be approved except as provided in Section 17-3.2. Rather, each proposed conditional use shall be
evaluated by the Board of Zoning Appeals on an individual basis. This shall be done in relation to its
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this Chapter and with the standards for the
district in which it is located, in order to determine whether approval of the conditional use is appropriate
at the particular location and in the particular manner proposed.
17-3.2 Compliance with Other Requirements
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use guaranteed by state or
federal law. However, reasonable conditions may be required by the BZA in order to satisfy the purposes
as outlined in section 17-1.
17-4 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATIONS
17-4.1 Applicant
An application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate may be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals by
the owner, lessee, or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property.
17-4.2 Application
An applicant for a conditional use shall file a plan and an application on forms provided by the
Administrator of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The plan for the use and development of the tract shall
demonstrate that the general and specific criteria have been met.
17-4.3 Scheduling of Hearing and Transmittal of Application
Within five (5) days after filing of an application determined to be complete pursuant to Chapter 20, the
BZA Administrator shall:
(a) set a date for a public hearing not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty-two (62) days after filing of a
complete application.
(b) transmit a copy of the application and plan, together with the date of the scheduled hearing, to the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission for staff review and recommendation.
17-4.4 Staff Report
Within twenty (20) days after the filing of a complete application, the Administrative Official shall prepare
and transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals a written report incorporating or summarizing comments of
other departments, agencies, and officials. A recommendation shall be included, setting forth whether the
application for a conditional use should be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and reasons
for such recommendation.
17-4.5 Notice and Hearing
The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the adopted
Procedures, Rules and Regulations of the BZA. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days
before the hearing by notice in writing sent by the BZA Administrator to: the applicant, the township in
whose jurisdiction the tract is located, the owners within two hundred (200) feet in all directions. Notice
shall also be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the Township. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney.
17-4.6 Decision
Within twenty one (21) days after the close of the public hearing, the BZA shall, (1) approve the
conditional use; (2) approve the conditional use subject to further specified approvals or modifications
necessary to achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapprove the conditional use.
17-4.7 Notification of Decision
Following the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, that BZA shall return to the applicant one copy of
the resolution and submitted plans permanently marked to show either (1) approval of the conditional use;
(2) approval of the conditional use subject to further specified approvals or modifications necessary to
achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapproval of the conditional use.
17-5 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS
When an application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate is filed, applications shall be filed with the Board of
Zoning Appeals for all other required approvals, including variances.
17-5.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals
Whenever an applicant files an application for other approvals pursuant to this Section, all required notices
shall include reference to the request for any and all additional approvals.
17-5.2 Procedures and Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
Whenever an applicant files applications for other approvals pursuant to this Section, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall review and process all such applications at the same public hearing. In reviewing such
combined applications the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, except as hereinafter provided with respect to
limitations on the time for taking action, comply with all of the provisions of this Resolution applicable to
each of the applications.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act on any such combined application within the longest time period
applicable to any one of the individual applications or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. The Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue notices and certificates of such
action in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution applicable to the various applications involved.
17-6 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
In approving an application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a
finding that the proposed conditional use is appropriate in the location proposed. The finding shall be based upon
the general considerations set forth below, as well as the designated specific criteria for specific uses contained in
Section 17-7.
(a) Spirit and Intent. The proposed use and development shall comply with the spirit and intention of the Zoning
Resolution and with district purposes. The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general and
specific purposes for which this Resolution was enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were
established and complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provisions of this Resolution
authorizing such use.
(b) No Adverse Effect. The proposed use and development shall not have an adverse effect upon adjacent property, or the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
(c) Protection of Public Interests. The proposed use and development should respect, to the greatest extent practicable, the
natural, scenic, and historic features of significant public interest.
(d) Consistent with Adopted Plans. The proposed use and development shall, as applicable, be consistent with objectives,
policies and plans related to land use adopted by the Board of Township Trustees.
17-7 SPECIFIC CRITERIA PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES
In addition to the general considerations contained in Section 17-6, each conditional use is subject to one or more
specific criteria as identified in the Table in Section 17-12. The following list contains all the specific criteria with
each preceded by a number for reference in the Table in Section 17-12.
(1) Site shall contain a minimum of 5 acres and all buildings shall not occupy over 10 percent of the total area of
the site.
(2) Site shall contain a minimum of 20 acres.
(3) Interment shall not be within 50 feet of any property line and any mausoleum, crematory, or other structure
shall be at least 100 feet from every property line.
(4) Any structure (except fences), parking area, or storage area shall be setback at least 100 feet from every
property line.
(5) Setbacks from any adjacent residential property line shall be a minimum of 50 feet for all buildings and 25 feet
for all parking areas.
(6) Parking shall not be permitted in the area defined as the front yard setback of the existing zone district.
(7) Use shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
(8) The vehicular use area shall be located and designed so as to minimize impact on the neighborhood.
(9) Any use for which drop-off or pick-up of children, residents, visitors, products, or emergency vehicles is a
common occurrence shall provide for the separation of incoming and outgoing vehicles so as not to impede
other traffic.
(10) The use shall be located within 300 feet of an arterial highway.
(11) The facility shall be reasonably accessible, either by its location or transportation provided by the applicant, to
medical, recreational, and retail services as well as to employment opportunities that may be required by its
residents
(12)Measures shall be taken to minimize the impact of potential nuisances such as noise, odor, vibration, and dust
on adjacent properties.
(13)No exterior alterations of an existing structure shall be made that depart from the residential character of the
building. All new structures shall be compatible in residential design with the surrounding neighborhood.
However, any improvement required by code or necessitated by licensing requirements shall not be deemed
incompatible.
(14)The architectural design and site layout of the structure and the location, nature, and height of any walls,
screens, and fences are to be compatible with adjoining land uses and the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(15) Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with one of the following buffers as described in detail in Chapter
14:
(a) Boundary Buffer A (shown in Figure 14 A)
(b) Boundary Buffer B (shown in Figure 14 B)
(c) Streetscape Buffer (shown in Figure 14C)
(16) Signage shall be regulated as follows:
(a) No signs shall be erected for purposes of identification except a permitted street address sign
(b) One sign permitted at a maximum of 12 square feet and non-internally illuminated
(c) One sign permitted at a maximum of 32 square feet
(d) Subject to sign standards in Chapter 13
(17) The conditional use shall be subordinate to the principal permitted use with regard to usage and character.
(18)Outdoor playgrounds, tot lots, exercise areas, and pools shall be fully enclosed by a fence.
(19) All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties.
(20)Documentation indicating the need for the facility, the specific clientele it will serve, and the location and type
of similar facilities operated by the applicant shall be submitted as part of the application.
(21) Security measures shall be submitted as part of the application.
(22)The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in which the facility will maintain contact with
neighborhood residents along with a structured procedure whereby their grievances may be filed and resolved.
(23) A refuse collection plan shall be submitted as part of the application.
(24) Meals shall be served only to guests or residents of the facility and not to the general public.
(25)The intensity of the particular use shall be evaluated with regard to the location, size, and configuration of the
tract.
(26)An emergency response plan shall be submitted detailing safety measures and response procedures.
(27) No structure, storage area, or vehicular use area shall be located closer than:
(a) 100 feet to a residential use or district
(b) 200 feet to a residential use or district.
(28) No landing strip shall be closer than 1,000 feet from a residential use.
(29) Coverage of the required rear yard by the unit shall not exceed 10 percent, and coverage of the entire lot by the
unit and the principal unit shall not exceed 20 percent.
(30) The unit shall contain a maximum of 900 sq. ft. and not exceed 15 ft. in height.
(31) The terms of continuation of this use and those under which it shall eventually be removed or terminated are to
be specified in the application and contained within the approving Resolution.
(32) There shall be central management of the use to assure seasonal occupancy only (April 1 to October 31).
(33) All mechanical equipment is to be screened from view from any residential property line.
(34) All trash handling areas / dumpsters are to be located no closer than 25 feet from any residential property line
and must be screened from view.
(35) All photometric lighting levels are to be at 0 foot candles at all property lines
17-8 ACCESSORY USES TO CONDITIONAL USES
Any use or structure that is accessory to a conditional use shall be processed in the same manner as prescribed in
this chapter for conditional uses. If an application for an accessory use is made concurrently with an application for
the primary conditional use, they may be considered together as one application. Whether processed in conjunction
with a primary conditional use or as a later supplement to an existing primary conditional use, the accessory use
shall meet the appropriate specific criteria listed in Section 17-7 as well as the general conditions contained in
Section 17-6.
17-9 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES
In addition to the general standards contained in Section 17-6, the specific criteria contained in Section 17-7, all
conditional uses are subject to the following regulations.
17-9.1 Additional Conditions
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose additional conditions and limitations concerning use,
construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, timing of implementation, and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of this Resolution upon the premises benefited by a conditional use.
Such conditions are intended to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements
in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services or to assure compliance with
general or specific standards. However, such conditions shall not be used as a device to authorize as a
conditional use that which is intended to be temporary in nature. All such conditions, including the
designated specific criteria for a particular use, shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate. Violation of any such condition, limitation, or specific criteria shall be
a violation of this Resolution and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the Conditional Use Zoning
Certificate.
17-9.2 Effect of Approval of Conditional Use
The approval of a proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of
applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the regulations of the Township and
County, including but not limited to, a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, a building permit, a certificate
of occupancy and subdivision approval.
17-9.3 Certification of Conditional Use Plan Compliance
Upon receipt from the applicant of an application for a Zoning Compliance Plan certification, the
Administrative Official shall review the application to determine if it is complete pursuant to Chapter 20,
Section 20-2.2, including any additional conditions required in conjunction with the approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the completed application, the Administrative
Official shall either (1) certify that the Zoning Compliance Plan complies with the BZA approval; or (2)
refuse to certify the Zoning Compliance Plan for lack of compliance with the BZA approval.
17-9.4 Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions
Whenever any proposed conditional use authorized pursuant to this Chapter is made subject to conditions
or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit
with the Zoning Inspector so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
established by the Board of Township Trustees upon recommendation of the Administrative Official, to
recover the Township's actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations
have been met.
17-9.5 Limitations on Conditional Use Approval
The approval of a proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be deemed to authorize
only the particular use for which it was issued, and such authorization shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of twenty four
(24) consecutive months or more.
Except when otherwise provided in the Resolution for approving a conditional use, a conditional use shall
be deemed to relate to, and be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question rather than the owner or
operator of such use or lot.
17-9.6 Amendments to Conditional Uses
A Conditional Use Zoning Certificate may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures
and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this Chapter for its original approval.
17-10 PERIOD OF VALIDITY
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, no Conditional Use Zoning Certificate
shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless a building permit is issued.
17-11 APPEAL OF DECISION
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
17-12 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
FACILITIES
17-12.1 Definitions
Adult Entertainment Facility shall mean an establishment having a significant portion of its function as
adult entertainment which includes the following listed categories:
A. Adult Arcade means a commercial establishment, where for any form of consideration, one (1) or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines or other image producing
machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or
descriptions of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
B. Adult Book Store, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store means an establishment having as a
significant or substantial portion of its sales inventory such adult materials.
C. Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater means a facility with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons,
used for presenting adult material for observation by patrons therein.
D. Adult Motel or Hotel means an establishment offering public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, characterized by the depiction of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which advertises the availability of
this type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of offpremises
advertising; or offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or
allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a period of time less than ten (10) hours.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater means an enclosed motion picture theater or motion picture drive-in
theater used for presenting adult material for observation by patrons therein.
F. Adult Entertainment Business means any establishment involved in the sale of services or products
characterized by the exposure or presentation of “Specified Anatomical Areas” or physical contact of
live male or females, and which is characterized by salacious conduct appealing to prurient interest for
the observation or participation in by patrons. Services or products included within the scope of adult
entertainment business are photography, dancing, reading, massage, and similar functions which
utilize activities as specified above.
G. Escort Agency means a person or business association that, for any form of consideration, furnishes,
or offers to furnish an escort(s), guide(s), or date(s) for another person.
H. Massage Establishments means any establishment having a fixed place of business where massages
are administered for pay. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home,
medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or therapist duly licensed
by the State of Ohio, nor barber shops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the
scalp, the face, the neck, or the shoulder, or recreation centers and sports complexes.
I. Massage means a method of treating or stimulating the external parts of the human body by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, touching or vibrating with the hand or any instruments for pay.
J. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity, or
displays “specified anatomical areas”, is provided, for any form of consideration, to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
K. Specified Sexual Activities shall mean:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts, real or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, cunnilingus, or
fellatio;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breasts.
L. Specified Anatomical Areas shall mean:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
M. Sexual Encounter Establishment means a business or commercial establishment, that is one (1) of its
primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more
persons congregate, associate or consort, for the purpose of “specified sexual activities”, or the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas”, or activities when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or semi-nude (not including an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar person licensed in the state of Ohio, engages in medically approved and
recognized sexual therapy.)
17-12.2 Regulations
A. Required Conditions:
1. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within one thousand (1000) feet of any area
zoned for residential use within the Township jurisdiction.
2. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within a radius of one thousand (1000) feet of
any school, library, or teaching facility, whether public or private, governmental or commercial,
which school, library, or teaching facility is attended by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
3. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within a radius of one thousand (1000) feet of
any park or recreational facility attended by persons less than eighteen (18) years of age.
4. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of
any other adult entertainment facility or within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of any of the
following establishments:
a. Establishments for the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises.
b. Pawn shops.
c. Pool, billiard halls or amusement centers.
d. Dance halls or Dance Clubs.
5. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within a radius of one thousand (1000) feet of
any religious place of worship, which is attended by persons less than eighteen (18) years of age.
6. No adult entertainment facility shall be established within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of
any publicly funded facility.
7. Divisions (1) through (6) above, may be waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals provided that the
applicant provides affidavits of fifty-one (51) percent of the property owners and resident
freeholders within the above described radii, giving their consent to the establishment of an adult
entertainment facility, and if the Board determines:
a. That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby
properties and that the spirit and interest of this Section will be observed.
b. That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skid row or similar
depressed area.
c. That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation not will it interfere with any program of urban
renewal, residential or commercial reinvestment, or renovation of a historical area.
d. That all applicable regulations of this Section will be observed.
8. All building openings, entries, windows, etc. for adult entertainment facilities shall be located,
covered, or serviced in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or
semi-public areas, sidewalk or street. For new construction, the building shall be oriented so as to
minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from any public or semi-public areas.
9. No advertising signage for an adult entertainment facility, shall be visible from any interstate or
freeway. Furthermore, no off-premises signage advertising adult entertainment uses shall be
permitted.
10. Displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the
public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other areas public or semi-public.
11. No employees of the subject establishment shall conduct themselves outside the confines of the
structure in such attire and/or by actions, in a manner distracting, distasteful and/or detrimental to
adjacent business interests, residents or passersby.
12. No screens, loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used that can be seen or discerned by the
public from public or semi-public areas.
Table 17-12
CONDITIONAL USES
CONDITIONAL USES BY DISTRICT* Specific Criteria for
Conditional Uses
SPECIFIC USES AA-C D O E F (Numbers as per Sec.
17-7)
RESIDENTIAL USES:
Accessory Apartment C 13, 16a,17, 25
Bed and Breakfast C C 6, 8, 13, 16b, 19,
24
Day Care, Type A C 5, 7, 8, 9,14, 16a,
18, 19, 25
Granny Cottage C C 14, 16a, 29, 30, 31
Group Home C C 6, 11, 13, 14, 16a,
19, 20, 22
COMMERCIAL USES:
Office (excluding medical) -
low intensity (Max ISR = .50)
C 6, 7, 8, 14, 15
b&c, 16d, 19, 25
Restaurant or Bar as
accessory to office use
C 15, 16a, 17,
INDUSTRIAL USES:
Mini-Storage Facility C 5, 7, 15c, 16c, 21
Adult Entertainment Facility C See Section 17-12
for criteria.
Warehouse as accessory use C C 5, 8, 12, 16a, 17,
19
INSTITUTIONAL USES:
Church (ISR Max .45) C 6,8,12,14,15b,c,16
d,18,19,33,34,35
Cemetery C 2, 3, 7, 15 a&c,
16c, 19
Correctional Facility,
Halfway House
C 2, 7, 9, 15 b&c,
16c, 17, (19), 20,
21, 22, 25
Day Care Center, Child C 8, 9, 12, 15 a&c,
16b, 18, 19
Hospital C 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15
b&c, 16c, 19, 25
School C C 12, 15 a&c, 16c,
19
University or College C 4, 12, 15 a&c, 16c,
19
PUBLIC SERVICE USES:
Government Facility C C 5, 6, 8, 9, 15 a&c,
16c, 19
Library C C 5, 7, 8, 15 a&c,
16b, 19, 25
Park and Ride Facility C C 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 15
a&c, 16b, 19, 25
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL & ENTERTAINMENT USES:
CONDITIONAL USES BY DISTRICT* Specific Criteria for
Conditional Uses
SPECIFIC USES AA-C D O E F (Numbers as per Sec.
17-7)
Cultural Facility
Botanical Garden C 5, 6, 8, 16c, 19
Museum C 4, 7, 8, 12, 15
b&c, 16c, 19, 25
Outdoor drama theaters
(not drive-in’s)
C 1, 4, 8, 12, 15
a&c, 16c, 19, 22
Zoo C 2, 7, 8, 12, 15
a&c, 16c, 19, 21,
22, 23, 25, 26, 27b
Recreation, Community
Facility - Private
Athletic/Play Field C C 8, 12, 15a, 16c, 19,
21, 22, 23, 25
Club, Private C C 6, 7, 8, 14, 15
b&c, 16c, 19, 25
Golf Course C C 2, 5, 6, 8, 16c, 19,
24
Recreation Center, Internal C 8, 12, 14, 15a,
16b, 19
Summer Camp C 2, 9, 12, 16c, 19,
21, 26, 32
Swim/Tennis Facility C C 4, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15
b & c, 16c, 17, 18,
19, 21, 25
*Zone Districts:
AA-C = AA, A, A-2, B, B-2, & C Residential Districts F = Light Industrial District
D = Multi Family Residential Districts
O = Office District
E = Retail Business District
17-13 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO TELECOMMUNICATION
TOWERS IN AREAS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
17-13.1 Purpose and Intent
The following regulations are intended to minimize adverse health, safety, public welfare or visual impacts of
telecommunications facilities in areas zoned for residential use through buffering, sitting, design and construction,
and reduction of the need for new towers. It is the further purpose and intent of this Section to provide for
authorization of telecommunications facilities in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and
the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community. These regulations shall not unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communications services. This section shall also govern the
maintenance and removal of buildings and structures that are used in the provision of telecommunications service.
17-13.2 Authority and Scope
Except in accordance with Ohio Revised Code 303.211 and the provisions of this section of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution, no person shall, in an area zoned for residential use, located, erect, construct,
reconstruct, change, alter, use or enlarge any telecommunications tower. Whenever a notice has been
received or an objection has been lodged, in the manner prescribed in Ohio Revised Code Section 303.211
(B) (3), regarding a telecommunications tower in an area zoned for residential use, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall, upon application, have the power to issue at its discretion a Conditional Use Zoning
Certificate after public hearing, allowing the construction, location, erection, reconstruction, change,
alteration or enlargement of such telecommunication facility if it finds that the applicant has satisfied all of
the applicable requirements herein.
In the event of any inconsistency between this Section 17.13 and other provisions of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution, the provision of this Section shall prevail.
17-13.3 Exceptions:
1. A Zoning Certificate shall be granted as-of-right, without the need for public hearing, to
permit the construction of a new telecommunications facility in an area zoned for residential use if that new
tower or antenna is added to an existing tower (including electrical transmission towers and other utility
towers), and if such installation extends less that 25 feet above the original height of the structure on which
it is mounted.
2. Telecommunications towers not located in an area zoned for residential uses are exempt
from zoning.
3. Telecommunications towers located in an area zoned for residential use are exempt from
zoning unless within 15 days after the date of mailing of the applicant’s notice sent under division (B) (3)
(b) of Ohio Revised Code Section 303.211:
a. A Board of Township Trustees or a contiguous property owner gives written notice to the
Township Trustees requesting that the tower be subjected to zoning regulations, or
b. A member of the Township Trustees makes an objection to the proposed location of the
telecommunication tower.
17-13.4 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this Section:
Area Zoned for Residential Use. Land included in zoning districts where the primary permissible use is
residential development and land in all other districts within 300 feet of any residential district wherein
special provisions for setbacks, landscaping, buffers and other development standards may be required for
the protection of existing or future residential development.
Co-location. The use of a telecommunications tower by more than one wireless telecommunications
provider. Co-location also includes the location of telecommunications towers or antennas with other
facilities such as water tanks, electrical transmission towers or other utility facilities.
Telecommunication. The technology that enables information to be exchanged through the transmission of
voice, video, or data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems (also referred to as wireless
communication).
Telecommunications Tower. Any free-standing structure, or any structure to be attached to a building or
other structure; owned or principally used by a public utility or other person or entity engaged in the
provision of wireless telecommunication services; in an area zoned for residential use; at a height greater
than that permitted within the applicable zone, or an attached structure proposed at a height greater than
either the height of the building or structure to which it is to be attached or that permitted within the
applicable zone; to have attached to it radio frequency transmission or reception equipment. Towers may
be constructed as: a "monopole," meaning one cylindrical column in the air; a "lattice tower," meaning three
or more vertical legs trussed together; or a "guyed tower," meaning a structure that, because it is less
substantial, is secured to the ground by wires, cables or similar material. Such towers may be related to, but
are not limited to, radio and television transmission, microwave, commercial mobile, common carrier,
cellular telephone, and personal communications services. The tower site may include separate buildings or
accessory structures used to house any supporting electronic equipment.
17-13.5 Application Procedure.
The following procedures shall be in addition to any procedures required by this Chapter 17 pertaining to
conditional uses and the Ohio Revised Code pertaining to telecommunications towers.
Pre-application Conference. Any person or company intending to construct or to apply for the placement or
operation of a telecommunications tower or antenna within a residential district or an "area zoned for
residential use" as defined in Section 17.13-4 shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the
Zoning Administrator or designee. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to discuss the needs of
the applicant, evaluate the impact of the proposed tower on adjacent property and neighborhoods, discuss
possibilities of co-location, identify alternative suitable sites that may minimize the negative impact on
residential areas, and clarify application process and requirements.
17-13.6 Documentation
Any request filed under this Section for review of a proposal to construct a telecommunications tower or
antenna shall include the following:
1). Analysis of Co-location Alternatives. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, must
be submitted indicating that co-location of the proposed telecommunications facility with an existing
approved tower cannot be accommodated. The applicant’s certification shall include a listing of all existing
towers, a description of each existing site, and a discussion of the ability or inability to co-located on each
existing site according to the following scope of analysis:
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 200 feet, analysis must include all towers within a 1 ½ mile
radius,
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 100 feet but less than 200 feet, analysis must include all towers
within a 1 mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to be built at a height less than 100 feet, analysis must include all towers with a 1/2
mile radius.
Reasons for not co-locating on a site would include, but not be limited to, the following:
a) No existing telecommunications towers are located within the above radius of the site;
b) Existing telecommunications towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant’s engineering
requirements;
c) Existing telecommunications towers do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s
proposed antenna and related equipment;
d) Applicant’s planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned
equipment of the telecommunications tower, or the existing or planned equipment of the
telecommunications tower would cause interference with the applicant’s planned equipment which cannot
be reasonably prevented;
e) Unwillingness of the owner of the existing telecommunications tower to allow the sitting or enter into a colocation
proposal; or
f) Existing telecommunications towers do not provide an acceptable location for
requisite coverage for the applicant’s communications network.
2). Analysis of New Tower Site Alternatives. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence,
must be submitted indicating that a proposed new site for a telecommunications tower is an essential
location. The applicant’s certification shall include a listing of potential sites, a description of each
potential site (including ground elevations), and a discussion of the ability or inability of the site to host a
telecommunications tower according to the following scope of analysis:
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 200 feet, analysis must include all towers within a 1 ½ mile
radius,
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 100 feet but less than 200 feet, analysis must include all
towers within a 1 mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to be built at a height less than 100 feet, analysis must include all towers within a
1/2 mile radius.
Potential sites that should be considered (in order from most preferred to least preferred) include: existing
telecommunications towers and utility towers, public land in non-residential district, industrial districts,
commercial districts, and residential districts.
Reasons for not locating on a potential site would include, but not be limited to, the following:
•Unwillingness of the site owner to site a telecommunications tower on commercially reasonable terms;
•Topographic limitations of the site;
Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate transmission;
(a) Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction of a telecommunications tower;
2 Technical limitation of the telecommunications system;
(a) Existing potential sites do not provide an acceptable location for requisite coverage for the applicant’s
communications network.
3). Analysis of Visual Impact. The applicant for a Conditional Use Certificate to construct a
telecommunications tower shall submit, subject to a non-site owner’s permission to enter upon the land, a
pictorial representation, such as a silhouette drawing, photograph, etc., of the proposed telecommunications
facility from a point 400 feet from the facility in each of the four compass directions showing the
relationship of the tower and/or facilities against the massing of surrounding structures, trees, and other
intervening visual masses.
4). Expert Review. Prior to granting a Conditional Use Certificate, The Board of Zoning
Appeals may require that the applicant’s proposal and analysis be reviewed by an independent qualified
consultant(s), at the cost of the applicant. Special review fees, not to exceed $2500.00 may be established
to cover the costs of staff and/or external expert review of requests filed under this section.
5). Agreement to Enable Co-location. In the event of the construction of a new tower by the applicant, the
applicant shall agree to the shared use of such facilities, when technically feasible, by other
telecommunication companies upon payment of reasonable fees to the owner, or agreement to reciprocal
terms for co-location involving other site(s), provided such shared use does not violate any law, rule or
regulation. Any new towers shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more than one use. Such
agreement shall be incorporated on the conditional use plan.
6). Agreement to Accommodate Public Safety Antennas. The applicant shall agree to accommodate the
communications antennas of the local police, fire, ambulance and other government departments at no
charge where technically feasible. Such agreement shall be incorporated on the conditional use plan.
7). Consistency with Adopted Plans. A justification statement demonstrating that the proposed construction
is in agreement with any plans, relating to telecommunications towers, duly adopted by the Sycamore
Township Board of Trustees.
8). Agreement to Submit an Annual Network Inventory. On or before January 1st of each calendar year
each applicant (having conditional use approval of a telecommunications tower or facility) shall provide a
listing of the present locations of the applicant’s telecommunications towers and/or facilities in Sycamore
Township. With each application, the applicant shall provide any changes to the "annual" plan that have
occurred since January 1st or verify the continued accuracy of the plan submitted. Such agreement shall be
incorporated on the conditional use plan.
9). Guarantee of Removal if Abandoned. To ensure the removal of all improvements at any abandoned
telecommunications facility in an area zoned for residential use, any applicant filing a request, except for
multi-user co-location towers, under this Section shall, deposit with the Board of Zoning Appeals and to
the benefit of the Township Trustees a letter of credit, a performance bond, or other security acceptable to
the Township Trustees. Performance Bonds are to be issued by a bonding agency certified and licensed by
the State of Ohio. The bonding agency shall recommend the amount of the bond required covering the
costs in association with the removal of the improvements and the restoration of the land to its original
condition prior to the construction of the telecommunications tower. Verification of the performance bond,
line of credit or other security issued to guarantee the removal and restoration of the land, are to be
submitted to the BZA Staff on or before January 1 of each calendar year while the telecommunications
tower is in use. Any guarantee submitted shall be irrevocable and shall provide for the Township Trustees
to collect the full amount of the guarantee if the applicant fails to maintain the guarantee. A change in
ownership, lessee, successor by merger requires the issuance of a new guarantee. The new guarantee shall
be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals Administrator for approval and submission to the Township
Trustees. The owner or lessee shall enter into a written agreement with the property owner to remove all
improvements made in association with the construction of the tower and restore the property to its original
state when the telecommunications tower is no longer in use and or at the time of the termination of the
lease agreement.
10). Other Approvals. Proof shall be provided by the applicant in a form satisfactory to the Board of
Zoning Appeals that the proposal has been approved by all agencies and governmental entities with
jurisdiction, and conforms to all applicable requirements of the Ohio Department of Transportation, the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communication Commission, or the successors to their
respective functions.
17-13.7 Specific Criteria Pertaining To Telecommunications Towers.
At the time of filing of a request under this Section, the applicant shall provide information demonstrating
compliance with the requirements listed below.
1. Design. A new tower built in an area zoned for residential use shall, to the extent economically and
technologically feasible, be designed, engineered and constructed as follows: (a) a tower 75 feet tall or less
shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by one or more wireless
communication service provider; (b) a tower more than 75 feel tall but less that 150 feet tall shall be
designed, engineered and constructed to support antenna installed by two or more wireless communication
service providers, and (c) a tower 150 feet tall or more shall be designed, engineered and constructed to
support antenna installed by three or more wireless communication service providers. Monopole tower
installations are required unless it is demonstrated that another type of tower is required for safety purposes
or for co-location or multiple use requirements of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. Lot Size. Lot size shall be the minimum for the zoning district in which the telecommunication tower is
to be built. Sufficient ground space should be provided to enable multiple equipment structures in
accordance with co-location requirements and plans.
3. Setbacks for Towers. Telecommunication towers shall be located so as to establish a clear zone for
falling tower debris, ice and/or the collapse of the tower. Towers shall be located such that the distance
from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line of a residential use or district is a minimum of
100 percent of the proposed tower height and a minimum of 50 percent of the proposed tower height from
any adjoining nonresidential use or district.
4. Setbacks for Accessory Structures. All structures, except fences and underground shelters, shall be
located at least 50 feet from the property line of any residentially zoned property and shall, in all other
circumstances, observe the yard requirements of the district in which they are located.
5. Underground Shelters. Underground equipment shelters are encouraged in residential district, and may
be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
6. Fences. Fencing shall be utilized for aesthetics and public safety. Razor wire fencing
shall be prohibited. Barbed wire fencing may be used to enclose the facility and shall, if used, have barbed
wire strands not less than 7 feet and not more than 10 feet above grade and be a minimum of 30 feet from
any residential property line.
7. Screening and Landscaping. Existing on-site vegetation shall be maintained to the
greatest extent possible. In addition, landscaping or appropriate screening shall be required to screen the
support structure and any other ground level features. In general, landscaping should soften the appearance
of the tower site. The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit a combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping.
8. Signs. The only signs allowed shall be emergency information signs, owner contact information,
warning or safety instructions, and signs required by a federal, stated, or local agency. Such signs shall not
exceed 5 square feet in area.
9. Lights. Telecommunications towers and accessory facilities shall not be equipped with lights unless such
lighting is required due to factors outside of the applicant’s control. Security lighting within the tower
structure are permitted provided that such lighting is compliant with the lighting section of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Resolution.
10. Visual Impact. Telecommunications towers and accessory facilities shall be constructed using designs
and materials that reduce visual impact to the extent economically and technologically feasible. Facilities
which have a greater visual impact should be permitted (for example -- taller, lighting required, larger
ground space used) when the greater visual impact of a particular facility eliminates the need to construct
other facilities in an area zoned for residential use, thus resulting in a reduced total visual impact. Towers
and accessory facilities shall be designed, painted, located, landscaped and otherwise constructed so as to
reduce visual impact of the facility in the area zoned for residential use to the extent economically and
technologically feasible.
11. Abandonment. The applicant (or its successors) shall, within 30 days of permanently ceasing operation
of a telecommunication tower, provide written notice of abandonment to the zoning inspector. An unused
telecommunication tower may stand no longer than 12 months following abandonment. All costs
associated with demolition of the tower and associated equipment buildings shall be borne by the most recent
tower operator of record unless such costs are the contractual or legal responsibility of another party. A tower is
considered abandoned when it ceases transmission for 30 consecutive days. If the use of any
telecommunications tower is discontinued, the owner shall provide the Board of Zoning Appeals with a
copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations within 30 days of such notice to the FCC. If the
tower will not be reused, the owner shall have 180 days from submittal of the FCC notice to the BZA to
obtain a demolition permit and remove the tower that will not be reused. If the tower is to be reused, the
owner shall have no more than 12 months from submittal of the FCC notice to the BZA in which to
commence new operation of the tower that is to be reused. Upon failure to commence new operation of the
tower that is to be reused within 12 months, the tower shall be presumed abandoned, and the owner shall
immediately obtain a demolition permit and remove the tower that is presumed abandoned. If the owner
fails to remove a tower in the time provided by this paragraph, the BZA may cause the demolition and
removal of the tower and recover its costs of demolition and removal from the Guarantee deposited by the
applicant pursuant to Section 17-13.6 (9) above.
12. Maintenance. Every applicant, owner or operator of a telecommunications tower, in an area zoned for
residential use, shall annually file with the BZA, on or before January 1st of each year, a declaration that
each and every tower that it then maintains within Sycamore Township is used by that applicant for
wireless communication purposes.
Any owner of property used as a telecommunications tower site shall maintain such property and all
structure in good condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other debris.
17-13.8 Modifications.
Where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the conditions or circumstances relating to the particular
application are such that one or more of the requirements of this Section are not necessary or desirable for
the protection of surrounding property or the public health, safety or welfare, either at the time of
application or in the foreseeable future, and that such special conditions and circumstances make one or
more said requirements unduly burdensome, the Board of Zoning Appeals may modify or waive such
requirement, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification or waiver shall be
requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a written justification for each requested
modification or waiver.
17-13.9 BZA Action.
Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications tower or antenna shall
be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The BZA may not deny an application for a telecommunications tower or
antenna as a conditional use if the denial would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services.
Further, the BZA may not deny an application for a telecommunications tower or antenna as a conditional
use on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities
comply with the Federal Communication Commissioner’s regulations concerning such emissions.
CHAPTER 18
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
AND PUD PROCEDURES
18-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (“PUD”) Overlay District is to encourage the efficient use of land
and resources, promoting greater efficiency in public and utility services, orderly improvement of property in
accordance with community plans, and to encourage innovation in the planning and building of all types of
development without detriment to neighboring properties. The PUD regulations are intended to permit property to
be used in a manner or intensity not permitted as-of-right by the underlying district regulations.
18-2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY
The PUD District is an overlay of alternative regulations, including procedures and standards that are applicable to
all land within the jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The PUD
Overlay District is established on the official zoning map in accordance with Section 1-6 and Chapter 3. This
overlay district enables individual property owners to request administrative approval of PUD plans on their
property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
18-3 AUTHORITY
The Board of Township Trustees and the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission may, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set out in this Chapter and other regulations applicable to the district in which the subject
property is located, approve a development plan for a PUD for any use listed as a PUD in the Table of Permissible
Uses found in Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7.
18-3.1 Approval of PUD-1 Applications
Proposed planned unit developments whose net densities or intensities fall within the PUD-1 range, as
shown in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3 shall require administrative approval of a PUD Plan
(Planned Unit Development Plan) by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and certification of a
Zoning Compliance Plan by the Administrative Official.
18-3.2 Approval of PUD-2 Applications
Proposed planned unit developments whose net densities or intensities fall within the PUD-2 range, as
shown in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3 shall require review and recommendation of a PUD
Plan (Planned Unit Development Plan) by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, legislative
approval of a PUD Plan by the Board of Township Trustees and certification of a Zoning Compliance Plan
by the Administrative Official.
18-3.3 Approval of Modifications of Specific Requirements
The specific requirements in this Resolution for lot areas, height, yards, buffers, perimeter setbacks,
parking (including provision of compact car spaces), landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise shall apply to
all planned unit developments unless they are modified by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or
Board of Township Trustees with specific findings that the general standards in section 18-7 will still be
met. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to enable modification of the average net density (dwelling
units per acre) or intensity (impervious surface ratio) requirements for PUD-1 and PUD-2 applications.
18-4 EFFECT OF PUD LISTING
18-4.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements
The listing of a use in the Table of Permissible Uses or in any district regulation as being permitted with a
PUD Zoning Certificate does not constitute an assurance or presumption that a proposed development plan
will be approved except as provided in Section 18-4.2. Rather, each proposed development plan shall be
evaluated by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or Board of Township Trustees, as the case may
be, on an individual basis. This shall be done in relation to its compliance with the standards and
conditions set forth in this Chapter and with the standards for the district in which it is located, in order to
determine whether approval of the development plan is appropriate at the particular location and in the
particular manner proposed.
18-4.2 Compliance with Other Requirements
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use guaranteed by state or
federal law.
18-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR PUD PLANS
18-5.1 Pre-application Conference
Prior to preparing or submitting a complete application for PUD Plan approval pursuant to Section 18-5.2,
an applicant shall meet with the Administrative Official to present the concept of the proposed
development and to discuss the procedures and standards for development plan approval. The preapplication
conference is intended to facilitate the filing and consideration of an innovative development
plan and complete application consistent with adopted plans and applicable zoning regulations. No
representation made by the Administrative Official during such conference or at any other time shall be
binding upon the Township with respect to the application subsequently submitted.
18-5.2 Applicant
A PUD Plan application may be filed with the Administrative Official by the owner or lessee of the subject
property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property.
18-5.3 Application
An applicant for a planned unit development shall file an application on a form or forms provided by the
Administrative Official with a PUD Plan. The plan for the use and development of the tract may be
submitted as either: (a) a conceptual plan showing the areas within which buildings, parking areas, and
buffering are to be located accompanied by a detailed description on the plat identifying the permissible
range or limits of size, type, and other pertinent details for buildings, buffer/landscape areas, parking areas,
signage, lighting, access, circulation patterns, and other details as requested, or (b) a detailed plan meeting
the requirements of a Zoning Compliance Plan as defined in Chapter 2. The PUD may be approved by the
Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and the Board of Township Trustees, as the case may be, on the
basis of such conceptual or detailed plan provided said plan otherwise complies with all regulations.
18-5.4 Staff Report
The Administrative Official shall prepare and transmit to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission
prior to their public hearing a written report incorporating or summarizing comments of other departments,
agencies and officials. A recommendation shall be included, setting forth whether the PUD application
should be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and reasons for such recommendation.
18-5.5 Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Hearing and Decision
Within ten (10) to forty-five (45) days following receipt of the PUD application determined to be complete,
the Commission shall hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed in the adopted Organization,
Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Commission. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Commission shall, on the basis of written findings relative to the standards set forth in Section 18-7, either
(1) approve the PUD Plan; (2) approve the PUD Plan subject to further specified approvals or
modifications necessary to achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapprove the PUD Plan.
18-5.6 Notification of Decision
The Administrative Official shall notify the applicant of the decision or recommendation of the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission, as the case may be, as follows:
(a) PUD-1. The action of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, and one copy of the submitted plans
permanently marked to show such decision, shall be transmitted to the applicant.
(b) PUD-2. The recommendation of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission shall be transmitted to the
applicant and such recommendation together with the staff report and the complete application shall be
transmitted to the Board of Township Trustees for action pursuant to Section 18-5.8.
18-5.7 Board of Township Trustees Hearing and Decision on PUD-2 Application
Following the recommendation of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission regarding a PUD-2
application, the Board of Township Trustees shall hold a public hearing within thirty-one (31) days. At the
conclusion of such hearing the Board shall, on the basis of written findings relative to the standards set
forth in Section 18-7, either (1) approve the PUD Plan; (2) approve the PUD Plan subject to further
specified approvals or modifications necessary to achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3)
disapprove the PUD Plan.
18-5.8 Effect of PUD Plan Approval
The approval of a PUD Plan by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission or by the Board of Township
Trustees as being in compliance with standards of approval pursuant to Section 18-7 shall not be
considered to be an amendment or supplement to this Zoning Resolution and, in accordance with
Section 519.021 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall not be subject to referendum for the purpose of
Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
18-5.9 Period of Validity
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, no PUD Plan (for
PUD-1, PUD-2, or S-PUD approvals) shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless a building
permit is issued.
18-6 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS
When an application for approval of a PUD also requires a zone amendment or any other zoning approvals, the
applicant shall indicate that fact on the application when submitted to the Administrative Official. At the time of
filing the application for a PUD, applications shall be filed with the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission for all
other required approvals.
18-6.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals
Whenever an applicant files an application for other approvals pursuant to this Section, all required notices
shall include reference to the request for any and all additional approvals.
18-6.2 Procedures and Action
Whenever an applicant files applications for other approvals pursuant to this Section, the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission and Board of Township Trustees shall review and process all such
applications at the same public hearing. In reviewing such combined applications, the Sycamore Township
Zoning Commission and Board of Township Trustees shall, except as hereinafter provided with respect to
limitations on the time for taking action, comply with all of the provisions of this Resolution applicable to
each of the applications.
Any such combined application shall be acted on within the longest time period applicable to any one of
the individual applications or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The
Administrative Official shall issue notices and certificates of such action in accordance with the provisions
of this Resolution applicable to the various applications involved.
18-7 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PUD PLAN APPROVAL
In determining whether a PUD Plan filed pursuant to this Chapter shall be approved or recommended for approval,
the Administrative Official, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, and the Board of Township Trustees
shall apply the following general standards.
(a) Compliance with this Zoning Resolution and with the purposes of the Zone District in which the proposed use and
development is to be located;
(b) Applicability of and consistency with adopted objectives and policies of the Township related to land use and
township plans duly adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission;
(c) Compatibility with surrounding land uses;
(d) Whether the size and physical features of the project area enable adequate protection of surrounding property and
orderly and coordinated improvement of property in the vicinity of the site;
(e) Whether the proposed phasing of the development is appropriate and the development can be substantially completed
within the period of time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the applicant;
(f) Whether the proposed development is served adequately and efficiently by essential public facilities and services
which are in existence or are planned;
(g) Whether significant scenic or historic features, as identified in plans duly adopted by the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission, are adequately conserved;
(h) Whether modifications of the zoning or other regulations are warranted by the innovative design of the development
plan;
(i) The adequacy of proposed pedestrian circulation system to insulate pedestrian circulation from vehicular movement;
(j) The adequacy of the provisions for visual and acoustical privacy.
18-8 ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN -- CERTIFICATION OF PUD PLAN
COMPLIANCE
18-8.1 Review
Upon receipt from the applicant of an application for a Zoning Compliance Plan certification, the
Administrative Official shall review the application to determine if it is complete pursuant to Chapter 20,
including any modifications required in conjunction with the approval by the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission or by the Board of Township Trustees, as the case may be.
18-8.2 Conveyance
Any land identified on the PUD Plan as common open space to be conveyed to an owners association, shall
be so conveyed subject to a covenant restricting the common open space to the uses specified in the Zoning
Compliance Plan and providing for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures
its use for the purposes intended. All such conditions, easements and open space covenants shall
specifically provide for enforcement by the Township.
18-8.3 Decision
Within seven (7) days of receipt of the completed application, the Administrative Official shall either (1)
certify that the Zoning Compliance Plan complies with the approved PUD Plan; or (2) refuse to certify the
Zoning Compliance Plan for lack of compliance with the approved PUD Plan.
18-8.4 Effect
A Zoning Compliance Plan as finally approved and certified in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall not be modified, except pursuant to Section 18-9.
18-9 ADJUSTMENTS TO PUD PLAN
Adjustments to an approved PUD Plan or previously approved Zoning Compliance Plan may be considered minor
or major and shall be reflected on a Zoning Compliance Plan. Such adjustments may be considered provided there
is no modification of written conditions of approval or of recorded easements. Further, any modifications must be
in substantial conformity with the intent of the PUD approval. For any adjustments of a technical or engineering
nature, the applicant shall submit a report from the appropriate public agency assuring compliance with agency
regulations.
18-9.1 Minor Adjustments
The Administrative Official has the authority to consider minor adjustments through the procedure defined
in Section 18-8. Minor adjustments shall be the minimum necessary to overcome a particular difficulty or
to achieve a more functional and desirable use of the property than was initially anticipated. No
adjustment shall result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this Resolution nor create or extend
any previously approved variance. Minor adjustments shall be limited to altering the location of structures,
circulation elements, open space or grading where such alterations will comply with the intent of all
perimeter setbacks and buffer yards that are required by any regulation or by the approved PUD plan.
18-9.2 Major Adjustments
Any adjustment to the PUD Plan within the criteria of Section 18-9 but not authorized by Section 18-9.1
shall be considered a major adjustment. The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, following notice to
all property owners whose properties are located within two hundred (200) feet of the PUD, shall hold a
public hearing within ten (10) to forty five (45) days of receipt of the completed Zoning Compliance Plan
application. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Board of Township Trustees to approve, deny, or add conditions for the application for a major adjustment
to the PUD Plan. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission shall
forward the recommendation to the Sycamore Township Board of Trustees. Following the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission hearing, the Sycamore Township Board of Trustees, following notice to all
property owners whose properties are located within two hundred (200) feet of the PUD, shall hold a
public hearing within ten (10) to forty five (45) days after receipt of the recommendation by the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Board of Township Trustees
shall approve, deny, or modify.
18-10 APPEALS
18-10.1 Appeal of Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Decision
Any party aggrieved by the administrative decision of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission for a
PUD-1 may appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of decision to the Board of Township Trustees.
18-10.2 Appeal of Administrative Official’s Decision
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Administrative Official concerning the certification of a Zoning
Compliance Plan in the case of a PUD-1 or a PUD-2 approval or a decision regarding a minor adjustment,
may appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of decision to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission.
18-10.3 Appeal of Board of Township Trustee’s Decision
Any party aggrieved by the administrative decision of the Board of Township Trustees in the case of a
PUD-2 approval or a decision on an appeal pertaining to a PUD-1 or PUD adjustment may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or
unlawful.
CHAPTER 19
DECISION MAKING/ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS
19-1 BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES
The Board of Township Trustees has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
(a) To initiate by resolution amendments or supplements to the text of this Resolution and to the Zoning Map;
(b) To consider and adopt, reject or modify amendments or supplements to the text of this Resolution and to the Zoning
Map;
(c) To consider and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove PUD Plans for PUD-2s (planned unit developments
requiring Board of Township Trustees final approval);
(d) To modify specific requirements in this resolution for lot areas, height, yards (buffers), perimeter setbacks, parking,
landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise in PUD-2s after making specific findings of compliance with general standards
(e) To hear and decide appeals concerning planned unit developments pursuant to Chapter 18, Sections 18-10.1 and 18-
10.2;
(f) To take such other actions not delegated to other bodies that may be desirable and necessary to implement the
provisions of this Resolution.
19-2 SYCAMORE TOWNSHIP ZONING COMMISSION
19-2.1 Membership
The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission consists of (5) members, appointed by the Township
Trustees, who must be residents of the unincorporated territory of Sycamore Township included in the area
zoned.
19-2.2 Jurisdiction and Authority
The Sycamore Township Zoning Commission has the following powers and duties in connection with the
implementation of this Resolution:
(a) To submit a plan, including both text and maps, representing its recommendations for the carrying out, by the
Board of Township Trustees, of the powers, purposes and provisions set forth in the Ohio Revised Code;
(b) To initiate amendments to this Resolution, to certify amendment requests to the Zoning Commission, to
cause required notice and public hearings to be held, and to determine the extent and method of additional
notice beyond that required;
(c) To make recommendations to the Board of Township Trustees on proposed amendments to this Resolution
and on PUD Plans for PUD-2s (planned unit developments requiring Board of Township Trustees final
approval for increases in development intensity);
(d) To approve PUD Plans for PUD-1s (planned unit developments requiring Rural Zoning Commission final
approval for increases in development intensity or clustering of single family density);
(e) To hear and decide appeals of the decision of the Administrative Official concerning the certification of a
Zoning Compliance Plan for a PUD-1;
(f) To maintain a file on the Official Zoning District Map(s);
(g) To modify supplemental regulations in SPI Special Public Interest Districts after public hearing in
accordance with conditions and limits;
(h) To determine required setbacks for parking along entry drives based on traffic generation and parking lot
size;
(i) To modify landscaping requirements for vehicular use areas;
(j) To prepare Development Plan Guidelines for outdoor lighting;
(k) To approve localized alternative sign regulations in Planned Unit Developments;
(l) To review woodland preservation plans and reduce the required number of parking spaces up to ten percent
(10%) and vary the intensity up to ten percent (10%) of the district limits for PUD’s;
(m) To review riparian buffer plans and reduce or eliminate requirements for landscaping and buffer yards;
(n) To modify or waive buffer yard and landscaping requirements consistent with general standards and the
spirit and intent of the resolution;
(o) To modify the minimum area requirement for Planned Unit Developments;
(p) To approve major adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans, not requiring a modification of written
conditions of approval or recorded easements, after public hearing;
(q) To modify specific requirements in this resolution for lot areas, height, yards (buffers), perimeter setbacks,
parking, landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise in PUD-1s after making specific findings of compliance with
general standards.
(r) To prepare and update, for consideration of adoption by the Board of Township Trustees, the
following specific plans:
(1) Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution
(2) Special Public Interest - Natural Resource Strategies
(3) Special Public Interest - Neighborhood Quality Strategies
(4) Special Public Interest - Suburban Center Strategies
(5) Special Public Interest - Suburban Corridor Strategies
(6) Special Public Interest - Suburban Village Strategies
(7) Township Corridor studies
(8) Township Land Use Plans
(9) Township Coordinated Land Use Plan
19-2.3 Officers
The officers of the Commission are a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman and such other officers as it may
provide for in the adopted Organization, Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Commission.
19-2.4 Meetings; Records
The Commission holds meetings and makes and keeps a record of all meetings in the manner prescribed in
the adopted Organization, Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Commission.
19-2.5 Quorum and Vote
The quorum of the Commission and matters requiring a vote are defined in the adopted Organization,
Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Commission.
19-2.6 CONFLICTS
No member of the Zoning Commission may participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which
that member has any conflict of interest prohibited by state law, including but not limited to a pecuniary or
familial interest relating to any matter before the Commission. Members are removable for
nonperformance of duty, misconduct in office or other cause by the Board of Township Trustees upon
written charges having been filed with the Township Trustees and after a public hearing has been held
regarding such charges, a copy of the charges having been served upon the member so charged at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, either personally, or by registered mail, or by leaving the same at his usual
place of residence. The member must be given an opportunity to be heard and answer such charges.
Vacancies are filled by the Board of Township Trustees and are for the unexpired term.
19-3 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
19-3.1 Membership
The Board of Zoning Appeals consists of five (5) members, appointed by the Township Trustees, who
must be residents of Sycamore Township. The terms of all members must be of such length and so
arranged that the term of one member will expire each year. Each member serves until a successor is
appointed and qualified. Vacancies are filled by the Township Trustees and are for the unexpired term.
19-3.2 Jurisdiction and Authority
The Board of Zoning Appeals has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation
of this Resolution:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Resolution pursuant to the
procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 22;
(b) To authorize variances from the terms of this Resolution pursuant to the procedures and standards for
variances set forth in Chapter 21;
(c) To decide conditional use requests pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17.
19-3.3 Officers
The officers of the Board of Zoning Appeals are a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman and such other officers
as it may provide for in the adopted Organization, Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Board.
19-3.4 Minutes; Records
The Board of Zoning Appeals holds meetings and keeps a record of all meetings in the manner prescribed
in the adopted Organization, Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Board.
19-3.5 Quorum and Vote
The quorum of the BZA and matters requiring a vote are defined in the adopted Organization, Procedure
and Rules and Regulations of the Board.
19-3.6 Conflicts
No member of the Sycamore Township Board of Zoning Appeals may participate in the hearing or
disposition of any matter in which that member has any conflict of interest prohibited by state law,
including but not limited to a pecuniary or familial interest relating to any matter before the BZA.
Members are removable for nonperformance of duty, misconduct in office or other cause by the Board of
Township Trustees upon written charges having been filed with the Township Trustees and after a public
hearing has been held regarding such charges, a copy of the charges having been served upon the member
so charged at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, either personally, or by registered mail, or by leaving
the same at his usual place of residence. The member must be given an opportunity to be heard and answer
such charges. Vacancies are filled by the Board of Township Trustees and are for the unexpired term.
19-4 ZONING INSPECTOR
The Zoning Inspector has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
(a) To administer and enforce this Resolution;
(b) To issue various Zoning Certificates for buildings, structures or uses certifying compliance with the provisions of this
Resolution and to deny or revoke such Certificates due to lack of compliance;
(c) To certify that completed buildings, structures or uses comply with the provisions of this Resolution and supplemental
conditions of approval;
(d) To investigate and resolve all complaints which allege violation of this Resolution;
(e) Periodically inspect all planned development district projects installed prior to the enactment of this Resolution, and all
projects encumbered by covenants, and other such conditions imposed by this Resolution;
(f) To inspect all projects controlled by this Resolution to ensure that provisions required herein which require perpetual
maintenance, adjustment or revision, as so maintained, adjusted, or revised;
(g) To estimate the extent of damage or destruction of a structure housing a nonconforming use pursuant to Chapter 9,
Sections 9-2.8 and 9-3.4;
(h) To inventory, provide notice and maintain a public record of existing and new legal nonconformities and to review
and approve applications for nonconforming use zoning certificates;
19-5 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
The Administrative Official has primary responsibility for administering the duties of the Sycamore Township
Zoning Commission as required by this Resolution. These duties may be assigned to one or more individuals by the
administrative head of the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission. The staff person or persons to whom such
administrative functions are assigned shall be referred to in this Resolution as the "Administrative Official". The
Administrative Official has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
(a) To determine completeness of rezoning applications and to make recommendations on proposed amendments to the
text of this Resolution and the Zoning Map to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and to the Board of
Township Trustees;
(b) To schedule, provide notice of, and conduct public prehearing conferences required by this Resolution or by Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission Bylaws;
(c) To make recommendations on proposed conditional uses to the Board of Zoning Appeals;
(d) To make recommendations on proposed PUD’s to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission and the Board of
Township Trustees;
(e) To make recommendations on proposed localized alternative sign regulations to the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission;
(f) To make recommendations on proposed modifications and waivers of standards for buffer yards to the Sycamore
Township Zoning Commission;
(g) To maintain an official record of buffer agreements between different owners of adjacent parcels;
(h) To administer revocation of zoning certificates and assessment of penalties for violation of sign regulations;
(i) To review and certify compliance of Zoning Compliance Plans with PUD Plans;
(j) To review and certify compliance of off-street parking plans for five or more vehicles submitted with applications for
zoning certificates;
(k) To review and certify compliance of buffer plans submitted with applications for zoning certificates;
(l) To determine compliance with general criteria for:
(1) minimum landscape requirements for screening ground-mounted antennas;
(2) maximum hours and days of operation, maximum traffic, adequacy of off-street parking, adequacy of the
parcel size, traffic access and absence of undue adverse impact on other properties for temporary uses;
(3) bulk and yard requirements for temporary tents;
(4) required parking spaces for uses not expressly listed herein;
(5) joint use of required parking spaces;
(6) access to and from loading spaces;
(7) reduction of landscape requirements in lieu of woodland preservation;
(m) To authorize minor adjustments in Zoning Compliance Plans for PUD’s in accordance with criteria for approval of
final location of structures, circulation elements, open space, and landscape buffers;
(n) To authorize minor adjustments in type of landscape elements for PUD Zoning Compliance Plans;
(o) To make recommendations to the Board of Township Trustees regarding establishment and revision of fees for Zoning
Certificates and applications;
(p) To hold pre-application conferences with PUD applicants to review and advise on proposed development concepts;
(q) To determine completeness of applications;
(r) To make administrative interpretations of zoning regulations and permitted and conditional uses in accordance with
standards for such interpretation.
CHAPTER 20
ZONING CERTIFICATES, GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES
AND FEES
20-1 ZONING CERTIFICATE
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Resolution, no land shall be occupied or used and no building,
structure or sign shall be located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered, nor work commenced
upon the same, nor occupied or used in whole or part for any purpose whatsoever until the Zoning Inspector has
issued a Zoning Certificate. The Zoning Certificate shall state the zoning districts in which the proposed use is
located and that the proposed uses and structures comply with the provisions of this Resolution. The Zoning
Certificate shall also identify whether the proposed use is a Permitted Use, a Planned Unit Development, a
Conditional Use, or a Nonconforming Use. No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered, without a Zoning Certificate issued by
the Zoning Inspector. No Zoning Certificate shall be issued to make a change unless the changes are determined by
the Zoning Inspector to be in conformity with the provisions of this Resolution.
20-1.1 Application for Zoning Certificate
Application for a Zoning Certificate of the type required by the provisions of this Resolution shall be made
to the Zoning Inspector prior to the application for a construction permit at the Department of the Building
Commissioner. A record of all Zoning Certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the property or building affected.
20-1.2 Zoning Compliance Plan
Each application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a specified number of zoning compliance
plans and construction drawings, drawn to scale. Two (2) copies of the Plan shall be returned to the
applicant when approved by the Zoning Inspector. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the
location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey by a registered surveyor.
The lot and location of the building or structure thereon shall be staked out on the ground before
construction is started.
Applications that include multi-tenant structures (i.e. condominiums, apartments, office buildings,
shopping centers) shall identify the address and unity number of each unit within a building on the Zoning
Compliance Plan and no such unit(s) shall be consolidated or divided prior to issuance of a Zoning
Certificate authorizing such division or consolidation.
20-1.3 Fee
The fee for a Zoning Certificate shall be established, from time to time, by the Board of Township Trustees
upon recommendation of the Administrative Official.
20-1.4 Period of Validity
Subject to an extension of time by the Administrative Official, no Zoning Certificate shall be valid for a
period longer than one (1) year unless a building permit application is submitted in compliance with the
zoning certificate.
20-2 GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES
All applications for zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the
provisions of this Resolution shall be submitted in accordance with the following procedures.
20-2.1 Application
Submission of an application on a form or forms provided by the Administrative Official shall be required
for zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the provisions of
this Resolution.
20-2.2 Determination of Completeness of Any Application
Within eight (8) days after receipt of an application for an approval described in Section 20-2.1, the
Administrative Official shall determine if the application is complete. If the applicant is unable to furnish
the required plans, fees or forms, then the applicant will be notified.
20-2.3 Effect of Determination
The time limits for completion of the application review and the rendering of a final decision or
Certification of Compliance as provided for specifically in the chapters of this Resolution governing
approvals of zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the
provisions of this Resolution, shall commence on the date that the Administrative Official determines that
the application is complete.
20-3 FEES
A schedule of non-refundable fees in connection with applications for a zoning amendment, a Zoning Certificate, or
any other type of approval required by the provisions of this Resolution shall be established by the Board of
Township Trustees and revised from time to time upon recommendation by the Administrative Official. The current
Fee Schedule shall be made available upon request at the office of the Administrative Official.
20-4 ZONE DISTRICT CERTIFICATION
The existing zoning of a specified parcel or parcels can be certified by the Administrative Official upon receipt of
the applicable fee and a type written request to the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission specifying the
property’s Book, Page and Parcel number and street address.
CHAPTER 21
VARIANCES
21-1 PURPOSE
The variance procedure is intended to provide a means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen particular
applications of this Resolution that create practical difficulties or particular hardships. When such difficulties or
hardships may be more appropriately remedied, if at all, pursuant to other provisions of this Resolution, the variance
procedure is inappropriate.
21-2 AUTHORITY
The Board of Zoning Appeals, pursuant to Section 519.14 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall have the authority to
grant variances from the provisions of this Resolution, but only in compliance with the procedures, specific
instances, and in accordance with each of the standards enumerated in this Chapter.
21-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK VARIANCES
Applications for variance may be filed on forms approved by the Board by any person having a legal or equitable
interest in the property affected.
21-4 PROCEDURE
21-4.1 Application
An application for a variance shall be filed with the Administrative Official of the Board. Application
requirements shall be established by Resolution by the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA).
21-4.2 Public Hearing
Upon receipt of a complete application for a variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, within a
reasonable length of time but no longer than sixty-two (62) days from the receipt of the application, hold a
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in writing to the property owners within 200 feet of
the subject property and by one (1) publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
Township, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by attorney.
21-4.3 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
Within thirty (30) days following the close of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall render
its decision, granting or denying the variance pursuant to the standards and procedures set out in this
Chapter. The Board may delay its decision pending revised plats or plans that may be required.
21-4.4 Special Procedures in Connection with Other Applications
Whenever it is determined a variance is needed in addition to a Zone Amendment, Conditional Use
approval or Zoning Compliance Plan approval, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not decide an
application for such variance until a final approval has been rendered by the Sycamore Township Zoning
Commission and/or the Board of Township Trustees, as applicable.
21-5 AUTHORIZED VARIANCES
21-5.1 Permitted Variances
Subject to the prohibitions set forth below, and subject to the other provisions of this Resolution, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may vary the provisions of this Resolution in the following cases and in no others:
(a) To vary the yard and bulk (but not the impervious surface ratio) requirements of any zoning district, except
where such requirements are approved in accordance with a PUD Plan;
(b) To reduce by not more than twenty-five percent (25%) or one space, whichever is greater, the minimum
number of off-street parking spaces or loading spaces otherwise required;
(c) To vary the number of parking or loading spaces required in connection with a change of use or an increase
in use intensity of an existing structure.
21-6 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES
21-6.1 General Standard
No variance shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter that is greater than the minimum variation necessary
to relieve the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by the applicant. Such a showing
shall require proof that the variance being sought satisfies each of the standards set forth in this
Section 21-6.
21-6.2 Unique Physical Condition
The subject property is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a
unique physical condition, including presence of an existing use, structure or sign, whether conforming or
nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size; exceptional topographical features; or the
extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the subject property that amount to more than
a mere inconvenience to the owner and that relate to or arise out of the lot rather than the personal situation
of the current owner of the lot.
21-6.3 Not Self-Created
The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the owner or his
predecessors in title and existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a variance is
sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the adoption of
this Resolution, for which no compensation was paid.
21-6.4 Denied Substantial Rights
The carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which a variance is sought would deprive the
owner of the subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the
same provision.
21-6.5 Not Merely Special Privilege
The alleged hardship or difficulty is not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some
special privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the same
provision, nor merely an inability to make more money from the use of the subject property. However,
where the standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship shall not be a prerequisite
to the grant of an authorized variance.
21-6.6 Resolution Purposes
The variance would not result in a use or development of the subject property that would be not in
harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Resolution and the provision from which a
variance is sought were enacted.
21-6.7 Essential Character of the Area
(a) The variance would not result in a use or development on the subject property that would be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development value of property
or improvements permitted in the vicinity;
(b) would materially impair an adequate supply of light due to adverse location of shadow to the properties and
improvements in the vicinity;
(c) would substantially increase hazardous conditions in the public streets due to traffic or parking;
(d) would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire;
(e) would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
(f) would endanger the public health or safety.
21-7 VARIANCE LESS THAN REQUESTED
A variance less than or different than that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to
some relief but not to the relief requested.
21-8 CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning construction,
character, location, landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this
Resolution upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public
facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the variance.
Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Resolution and shall constitute grounds for
revocation of the variance.
21-9 EFFECT OF GRANT OF VARIANCE
The grant of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure. It shall merely authorize the
preparation, filing and processing of applications for any permits and approval that may be required by Township
regulations, including, but not limited to, a Zoning Certificate, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, and
subdivision approval.
21-10 LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCES
Subject to an extension of time granted upon application to the Board of Zoning Appeals, no variance shall be valid
for a period longer than six (6) months unless applications for permits or approvals referenced in Section 21-9 have
been filed, building permits issued and construction is diligently pursued to completion.
A variance shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was issued and
shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such construction or development shall be
removed and not replaced within six (6) months following such removal unless extended in writing by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
CHAPTER 22
APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
22-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to set forth the standards and procedures by which administrative relief may be taken
from any order, requirement decision or determination made by the Administrative Official.
22-2 AUTHORITY
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
Resolution.
22-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO APPEAL
An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any Officer of the
Township affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer.
22-4 PROCEDURE
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the following procedures.
22-4.1 Notice of Appeal
Appeals to the Board shall be taken within twenty (20) days following the order, requirement, decision, or
determination being appealed by filing with the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board,
in such number of duplicate copies as the Board may from time to time require, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefore.
22-4.2 Fees
Nonrefundable application and hearing fees shall accompany the notice of appeal. Such fees are
established by the Board, from time to time with the approval of the Board of Township Trustees, to help
defray administrative costs and costs of a hearing.
22-4.3 Stay of Proceeding
An appeal to the Board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
appealed order, requirement, decision or determination was made unless the Officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by
reason of facts stated in writing to the Board a stay would, in that Officer’s opinion, cause imminent peril
to life of property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Court of
Common Pleas of Hamilton County upon notice to the Board and to the Officer, and on due cause shown.
22-4.4 Public Hearing Notice
Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board shall, within a reasonable length of time but no longer than
sixty-two (62) days from the receipt of the notice of appeal, hold a hearing of the appeal in accordance with
its procedures as provided in Section 22-4. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in writing to the
property owners within 200 feet of the subject property and by one (1) publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the Township, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public
hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney.
22-4.5 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
Within one hundred twenty (120) days following the filing of a notice of appeal and within thirty (30) days
after the closing of the public hearing, the Board shall render its decision on the appeal. Such decision may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the appealed order, requirement, decision or
determination. The failure of the Board to render a decision within the one hundred twenty (120) days, or
such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant. Within ten (10) days following such decision or the expiration of such period without a
decision, the Board shall publish notice and mail a certificate of such decision or failure to act to all parties
entitled thereto.
22-5 RIGHT TO GRANT VARIANCE IN DECIDING APPEALS
In any case where the notice of appeal is accompanied by an application for a variance in accordance with
Chapter 21, the Board may grant a variance as part of the relief sought on approval, but only in strict compliance
with each of the provisions of Chapter 21.
22-6 APPEAL OF DECISION
Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common
Pleas of Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
CHAPTER 23
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
23-1 AUTHORITY
The Administrative Official, subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations of this Chapter, may render
interpretations, including use interpretations, of the provisions of this Resolution and of any rule or regulation
issued pursuant to it.
23-2 PURPOSE
The interpretation authority established by this Chapter is intended to recognize that the provisions of this
Resolution, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific situation to which
they may have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the
specific provisions of this Resolution in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have
been enacted. Because the interpretation authority established is an administrative rather than a legislative
authority, it is not intended to add to or change the essential content of this Resolution but rather is intended only to
allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
23-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK INTERPRETATIONS
Applications for interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the circumstances giving rise to the
need for an interpretation; provided that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on
hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than as an advisory opinion.
23-4 PROCEDURE
23-4.1 Application
Applications for interpretations of this Resolution shall be filed on a form provided by the Administrative
Official and shall contain the following information:
(a) The specific provision or provisions of this Resolution for which an interpretation is sought.
(b) The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the request for an interpretation.
(c) The precise interpretation claimed by the application to be correct or incorrect.
(d) When a use interpretation is sought, the use permitted pursuant to the present zoning classification of the
subject property that is claimed by the applicant to include, or to be most similar to, the proposed use.
(e) When a use interpretation is sought, documents, statements, and other evidence demonstrating that the
proposed use will comply with all use limitations established for the district in which it is proposed to be
located.
23-4.2 Action on Application
Within thirty (30) days following the receipt of an application for interpretation determined to be complete
pursuant to Chapter 20, Section 20-2.2, the Administrative Official shall inform the applicant in writing of
his interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons, and analysis upon which the determination is
based. The failure of the Administrative Official to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the application rendered on the
day following such 30-day period.
23-4.3 Appeal
Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Administrative Official may be taken to the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to Chapter 22.
23-5 STANDARDS FOR USE INTERPRETATIONS
The following standards shall govern the Administrative Official and the Board of Zoning Appeals on appeals from
the Administrative Official in issuing use interpretations:
(a) Any use defined in Chapter 2 of this Resolution shall be interpreted as therein defined.
(b) No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it
will comply with each use limitation established for that particular district.
(c) No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses
permitted in such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted in a more
restrictive district.
(d) If the proposed use is more closely similar to a use permitted only as a conditional use in the district in which it is
proposed to be located, then any use interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate and all the specific criteria where appropriate for such use pursuant to Chapter 17.
(e) No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of
purpose of the district in question.
23-6 EFFECT OF FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS
No use interpretation finding that a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall
authorize the establishment of such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of
any building or structure. It shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any
permits and approvals that may be required by the regulations of the Township including, but not limited to: a
zoning certificate, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, subdivision approval, and development plan
approval.
23-7 LIMITATIONS ON FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Administrative Official, no use interpretation finding a use to be
permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months from the
date of issuance unless applications for permits or approvals referenced in Section 23-6 have been filed, building
permits issued, and construction is diligently pursued to completion.
A use interpretation, finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district, shall be
deemed to authorize only the specific use for which it was issued. Such permit shall not be deemed to authorize any
allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has not been issued. Such permit shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall for any reason be
discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more, unless extended in writing by the Administrative
Official or the Board of Zoning Appeals.
23-8 APPEALS FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
23-8.1 Procedure
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals in accordance with the provisions in Chapter
22.
CHAPTER 24
ENFORCEMENT
24-1 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
Whenever the Zoning Inspector receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Resolution, he/she
shall investigate the complaint within ten (10) working days and take whatever action is warranted, and inform the
complainant in writing as to what actions have been or will be taken.
24-2 PERSONS LIABLE
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the
requirements of this Resolution may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to
the remedies herein provided.
24-3 PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS
24-3.1 Written Notice
If the Zoning Inspector finds that any provision of this Resolution is being violated, a written final notice
(the initial written notice may be the final notice) shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested. It shall state what action the Zoning Inspector intends to take if the violation is not corrected
and shall advise that the Zoning Inspector's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22. Additional written notices may be sent at the
Zoning Inspector's discretion.
24-3.2 Compliance Timeframe
Upon receipt of any complaint filed with the Planning & Zoning Department, the Zoning Inspector or
Administrative Official shall, within a reasonable length of time but no longer than ten (10) days from the
receipt of the compliant or investigation, investigate and determine if compliance is required in accordance
with its procedures as provided in Section 24-3.
24-3.3 Citation
If no action is taken within the time period allowed for correction, cessation, or appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, a citation shall be issued. The violator shall within twenty (20) days pay the citation to
the Clerk of Courts or the matter will be scheduled for court hearing. If no action is taken within these
twenty (20) days, additional citations may be issued each day the violation remains in noncompliance.
Each day the violation occurs after the citation is issued is a separate offense.
24-3.4 Emergency Enforcement
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously pose a danger to the public health,
safety, or welfare, the Zoning Inspector may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking
any of the penalties or remedies authorized in Section 24-4.
24-4 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS
24-4.1 Civil Penalty and Appeals
Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this Resolution or a failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with the
grants of variances or Conditional Use Zoning Certificates or Zoning Compliance Plan approval, shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty. A civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals
if the offender was sent a final notice of violation in accordance with Section 24-3 and did not appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals within the prescribed time.
24-4.2 Other Enforcement Actions
This Resolution may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action.
24-4.3 Multiple Citations
Each day that any violation occurs or continues (for each citation) after notification by the Zoning
Inspector that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and
remedies specified in ORC Chapter 519.
24-4.4 Multiple Remedies
Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this
Resolution.
24-5 ZONING CERTIFICATE REVOCATION
24-5.1 Grounds for Revocation
A Zoning Certificate may be revoked by the Zoning Inspector in accordance with the provisions of this
section if the recipient of the certificate fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the
plans submitted, the requirements of this Chapter, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed in
connection with the issuance of the Zoning Certificate.
24-5.2 Procedure
Before a Zoning Certificate may be revoked, all of the notice, hearing and other requirements shall be
complied with. The notice shall inform the certificate holder of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
(a) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the Zoning Inspector to conclude that a certificate
should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in Section 24-5.1 shall be upon the party advocating that
position.
(b) The action to revoke a Zoning Certificate shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact
that support the decision.
24-5.3 Notice
Before a Zoning Certificate may be revoked, the Zoning Inspector shall give the recipient of the certificate
ten (10) days notice of intent to revoke the certificate and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons
for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If the certificate is
revoked, the Zoning Inspector shall provide to the holder of the Zoning Certificate a written statement of
the decision and the reasons therefore.
24-5.4 Effect of Revocation
No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any Zoning
Certificate after such certificate has been revoked in accordance with this section.
24-6 JUDICIAL REVIEW
Any decision of the Board of Township Trustees, the Sycamore Township Zoning Commission, or the Zoning
Inspector granting, revoking, or denying a Zoning Certificate; and every final decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be subject to review by the Court of Common Pleas.
1 TITLE, APPLICABILITY, PURPOSE INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL EFFECT .............................. 1
1-1 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES. ...................................................................................................................... 1
1-2 TITLE. ........................................................................................................................................................... 1
1-3 JURISDICTION. ........................................................................................................................................... 1
1-4 INTERPRETATION. .................................................................................................................................... 1
1-5 SEVERABILITY. .......................................................................................................................................... 2
1-6 REPEAL OF PREEXISTING ZONING RESOLUTION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING
DISTRICTS. .................................................................................................................................................. 2
1-8 INITIAL EFFECTIVE DATE. ...................................................................................................................... 3
2 DEFINITIONS ..................................................................................................................................................... 4
2-1 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY. ..................................................................................................................... 4
2-2 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS. .................................................................................................................... 4
2-3 DEFINITIONS. ............................................................................................................................................. 4
3 DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP ................................................................................................................... 22
3-1 DISTRICTS. ................................................................................................................................................ 23
3-2 TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES. ............................................................................................................. 24
3-2.1 Permitted Use. ..................................................................................................................................... 24
3-2.2 Planned Unit Development - 1. ........................................................................................................... 24
3-2.3 Planned Unit Development - 2. ........................................................................................................... 24
3-2.4 Conditional Use. .................................................................................................................................. 24
3-2.5 Specific PUD. ...................................................................................................................................... 24
3-3 ZONING MAP. ........................................................................................................................................... 31
3-4 STATUS OF PLANNED DISTRICTS. ....................................................................................................... 31
3-5 ADDITIONAL USE, HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. .............................. 31
3-5.1 Height Of Institutions Related To Yards. ............................................................................................. 31
3-5.2 Height of Single Family Dwelling Related to Side and Rear Yard. ..................................................... 31
3-5.3 Structures Exempt from Height Limit. ................................................................................................. 31
3-5.4 Rear Yard on Double Frontage Lots. .................................................................................................. 32
3-5.5 Rear Yards Adjacent to Alleys. ............................................................................................................ 32
3-5.6 Construction in Required Rear Yard. .................................................................................................. 32
3-5.7 Low Projections in Required Front and Rear Yards. .......................................................................... 32
3-5.8 Commercial Awnings and Canopies in Required Yards. ..................................................................... 32
3-5.9 Stairways and Balconies in Required Yards. ....................................................................................... 32
3-5.10 Required Yard for Multiple Family Dwellings. ................................................................................... 32
3-5.11 Projection of Porches and Patios in Required Front Yards. ............................................................... 32
3-5.12 Front Yards on Infill Sites. ................................................................................................................... 32
3-5.13 Limitation of One Main Building on Lot. ............................................................................................ 33
3-5.14 Yard Requirements Where Lot Includes More Than One Main Building. ........................................... 33
3-5.15 Fire Hydrants ..................................................................................................................................... 32
3-5.16 Pan-Handle Lots, Residential Districts…………………………………………………………………… .32
3-6 AGRICULTURE REGULATIONS. ........................................................................................................... 33
3-7 AGRICULTURAL USES. ........................................................................................................................... 33
3-7.1 Agricultural Setback. ........................................................................................................................... 33
3-7.2 Greenhouse Setback. ........................................................................................................................... 33
3-7.3 Agricultural Accessory Uses. ............................................................................................................... 33
3-8 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY REGULATIONS. .................................. 34
3-9 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY USES. ..................................................... 34
3-9.1 Veterinary Facilities and Animal Care. ............................................................................................... 34
3-9.2 Veterinary Facilities in Office Districts. .............................................................................................. 34
3-9.3 Veterinary Facilities in Retail Districts. .............................................................................................. 34
3-9.4 Agricultural Accessory Uses. ............................................................................................................... 34
4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ........................................................................................................................... 41
4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 35
4-1.1 Statement of Intent. .............................................................................................................................. 35
4-1.2 Accessory Uses and Structures. ........................................................................................................... 35
4-1.3 Conditional Uses. ................................................................................................................................ 35
4-1.4 Signs. ................................................................................................................................................... 35
4-1.5 Lot Area, Lot Width, Building Height and Yard Standards. ................................................................ 35
4-1.6 Parking Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 35
4-1.7 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection. ............................................................................................... 35
4-2 THE A-A, A, A-2, B, B-2 AND C RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ............................................................... 36
4-2.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 36
4-2.2 Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................................................... 36
4-2.3 Planned Unit Developments. ............................................................................................................... 36
4-2.4 Maximum Height and Minimum Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements. .......................................... 36
4-2.5 Single Family Planned Unit Development (PUD) Standards for Patio, Zero-Lot-Line
and Single-Family Detached, Clustered Dwellings. ............................................................................ 36
4-3 DMULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. ...................................................................................... 40
4-3.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 40
4-3.2 Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................................................... 40
4-3.3 Planned Unit Developments. ............................................................................................................... 40
4-3.4 Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard Requirements. ..................................................................... 40
4-3.5 Maximum Building Height. .................................................................................................................. 40
4-3.6 Standards for Townhouse Dwellings. .................................................................................................. 41
5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .......................................................................................................................... 43
5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 44
5-1.2 Statement of Intent. .............................................................................................................................. 44
5-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions. ......................................................................................... 44
5-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures. ........................................................................................................... 44
5-1.4 Conditional Uses. ................................................................................................................................ 44
5-1.5 Planned Unit Developments. ............................................................................................................... 45
5-1.6 Signs. ................................................................................................................................................... 45
5-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards. .................................................................................................... 45
5-1.8 Parking Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 45
5-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection. ............................................................................................... 45
5-2 THE O OFFICE DISTRICT. ....................................................................................................................... 45
5-2.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 45
5-2.2 Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................................................... 45
5-3 THE E RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT. .................................................................................................... 46
5-3.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 46
5-3.2 Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................................................... 46
6 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................................................. 46
6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 47
6-1.1 Statement of Intent. .............................................................................................................................. 47
6-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions in the Industrial Districts. ................................................ 47
6-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures. ........................................................................................................... 47
6-1.4 Conditional Uses. ................................................................................................................................ 47
6-1.5 Planned Unit Developments. ............................................................................................................... 47
6-1.6 Signs. ................................................................................................................................................... 48
6-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards. .................................................................................................... 48
6-1.8 Parking Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 48
6-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection. ............................................................................................... 48
6-2 THE F LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. ................................................................................................. 48
6-2.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 48
6-2.2 Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................................................... 48
7 SPECIAL PURPOSE AND SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS ......................................................................... 49
7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 51
7-1.1 Statement of Intent. .............................................................................................................................. 51
7-1.2 Impact Controls. .................................................................................................................................. 51
7-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures. ........................................................................................................... 51
7-1.4 Signs. ................................................................................................................................................... 51
7-1.5 Parking Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 51
7-1.6 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection. ............................................................................................... 51
7-2 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS (“DOUBLE LETTER” DISTRICTS) ................................................................. 52
7-2.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 52
7-2.2 Classification. ...................................................................................................................................... 52
7-2.3 Procedure for District Designation ..................................................................................................... 52
7-2.4 Permissible Uses. ................................................................................................................................. 53
7-2.5 Lot Area, Bulk, Height, and Yard Requirements. ................................................................................ 53
7-2.6 Supplemental Regulations. .................................................................................................................. 53
7-2.7 Violation of Supplemental Regulations and PUD Plan. ...................................................................... 53
7-2.8 Adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans and PUD Plans. ................................................................ 53
7-2.9 Appeals. ............................................................................................................................................... 53
8 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST (SPI) OVERLAY DISTRICTS ................................................................. 52
8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 54
8-1.1 Statement of Intent. .............................................................................................................................. 54
8-1.2 Definition. ............................................................................................................................................ 54
8-1.3 Purposes. ............................................................................................................................................. 54
8-1.4 Identification. ....................................................................................................................................... 55
8-1.5 Applicability. ........................................................................................................................................ 55
8-1.6 Creation. .............................................................................................................................................. 55
8-1.7 Procedure. ........................................................................................................................................... 55
8-1.8 Supplemental SPI District Regulations. ............................................................................................... 55
8-1.9 Classification. ...................................................................................................................................... 56
8-2 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-NATURAL RESOURCE DISTRICTS. ................................................... 56
8-2.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose. ......................................................................................... 56
8-2.2 Characteristics. .................................................................................................................................... 56
8-2.3 Designation. ......................................................................................................................................... 56
8-3 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST - NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY DISTRICTS. ....................................... 57
8-3.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose. ......................................................................................... 57
8-3.2 Characteristics. .................................................................................................................................... 57
8-3.3 Designation. ......................................................................................................................................... 57
8-4 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-SUBURBAN CENTER/CORRIDOR DISTRICTS. ................................ 57
8-4.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose. ......................................................................................... 57
8-4.2 Characteristics. .................................................................................................................................... 58
8-4.3 Designation. ......................................................................................................................................... 58
8-5 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-SUBURBAN VILLAGE DISTRICTS. ................................................... 61
8-5.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose. ......................................................................................... 61
8-5.2 Characteristics. .................................................................................................................................... 61
8-5.3 Designation. ......................................................................................................................................... 61
8-6 DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZATION ...................................................................................................... 61
8-6.1 Applications; Contents. ........................................................................................................................ 62
8-6.2 Modification Procedure. ...................................................................................................................... 62
8-6.3 Modification Limits. ............................................................................................................................. 62
9 NONCONFORMITIES EXCEPTIONS .......................................................................................................... 64
9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. ......................................................................................................................... 63
9-1.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................... 63
9-1.2 General Scope of Regulations. ............................................................................................................ 63
9-1.3 Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order. ............................................................................... 63
9-1.4 Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures. ................................................................................. 63
9-1.5 Burden of Establishing Legality of Nonconformity. ............................................................................ 63
9-1.6 Inventory and Notice of Nonconforming Uses. .................................................................................... 64
9-1.7 Zoning Certificate for Legal Nonconformity. ...................................................................................... 64
9-2 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES. ................................................................. 64
9-2.1 Authority to Continue. ......................................................................................................................... 64
9-2.2 Nonconforming Use Discontinued. ...................................................................................................... 64
9-2.3 Ordinary Repair and Maintenance of Structures. ............................................................................... 64
9-2.4 Structural Alteration. ........................................................................................................................... 65
9-2.5 Enlargement of Structure. .................................................................................................................... 65
9-2.6 Extension of Use Prohibited. ............................................................................................................... 65
9-2.7 Moving. ................................................................................................................................................ 65
9-2.8 Damage or Destruction. ...................................................................................................................... 65
9-3 NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES ........................................................................................................... 66
9-3.1 Authority to Continue. ......................................................................................................................... 66
9-3.2 Repair, Maintenance, and Alterations. ................................................................................................ 66
9-3.3 Moving. ................................................................................................................................................ 66
9-3.4 Damage or Destruction. ...................................................................................................................... 66
9-4 NONCOMPLYING LOTS OF RECORD. .................................................................................................. 66
9-4.1 Authority to Utilize for Dwellings. ....................................................................................................... 66
9-4.2 Regulations for Single Family Use of Noncomplying Lots. ................................................................ 66
9-4.3 Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots. .................................................................................................... 66
9-5 COMPATIBLE NONCONFORMING USES. ............................................................................................ 67
9-5.1 Application. .......................................................................................................................................... 67
9-5.2 Review and Decision. ........................................................................................................................... 67
10 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ................................................................................................ 67
10-1 GENERAL AUTHORIZATION. ................................................................................................................ 68
10-2 ZONING CERTIFICATES. ........................................................................................................................ 68
10-3 USE LIMITATIONS. .................................................................................................................................. 68
10-3.1 Principal Structure Permit Required. .................................................................................................. 68
10-3.2 Signs Prohibited. ................................................................................................................................. 68
10-3.3 Location. .............................................................................................................................................. 68
10-3.4 Decorative Features in Front and Side Yards. .................................................................................... 68
10-3.5 Play Devices in Rear Yards. ................................................................................................................ 69
10-4 HOME OCCUPATIONS. ............................................................................................................................ 69
10-4.1 General Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 69
10-4.2 Uses Prohibited as Home Occupations. .............................................................................................. 69
10-5 DUMPSTERS AND TRASH HANDLING AREAS FOR NON-SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS. ........... 70
10-5.1 Setbacks ............................................................................................................................................... 70
10-5.2 Location of Screen ............................................................................................................................... 70
10-5.3 Height and Construction of Screen ...................................................................................................... 70
10-6 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS. ............................................................................................................... 70
10-6.0 Applicability ......................................................................................................................................... 70
10-6.1 Site Plan. .............................................................................................................................................. 70
10-6.2 Standards. ............................................................................................................................................ 70
10-7 FENCES ANDWALLS. ............................................................................................................................. 71
10-7.1 Height and Open Face Area in Front and Side Yard. ......................................................................... 71
10-7.2 Height in Rear Yard. ............................................................................................................................ 72
10-7.3 Entrance Walls in Front Yard. ............................................................................................................. 72
10-7.4 Retaining Walls. ................................................................................................................................... 72
10-8 DAY CARE CENTERS AS ACCESSORY TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USE. ............................................ 72
10-8.1 Area of Outdoor Play Space. ............................................................................................................... 72
10-8.2 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space. ................................................................................ 72
10-8.3 Parking Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 72
10-9 DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICEWINDOWS. .................................................................... 72
10-9.1 Principal Use. ...................................................................................................................................... 72
10-9.2 Setbacks. .............................................................................................................................................. 72
10-9.3 Circulation and Stacking Space. .......................................................................................................... 73
10-9.4 Parking Standards ............................................................................................................................... 73
10-10 AUTOMOBILE RENTAL. ..................................................................................................................... 73
10-10.1 Signs................................................................................................................................................. 73
10-10.2 Parking. ........................................................................................................................................... 73
10-10.3 Parking Standards ........................................................................................................................... 73
10-11 HELIPORTS. ........................................................................................................................................... 73
10-12 DETACHED GARAGE, STORAGE STRUCTURES AND OTHER DETACHED
STRUCTURES. ....................................................................................................................................... 73
10-12.1 Area and Height. .............................................................................................................................. 73
10-12.2 Setback. ............................................................................................................................................ 73
10-12.3 Location. .......................................................................................................................................... 73
10-13 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS, TENNIS COURTS, BASKETBALL COURTS. ............................... 74
10-14 PRE-SCHOOL & ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AS ACCESSORY TO EXISTING CHURCHES. ....... 74
10-14.1 Building Location ............................................................................................................................ 74
10-14.2 Building Type ................................................................................................................................... 74
10-14.3 Area of Outdoor Play Space ............................................................................................................ 74
10-14.4 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space ............................................................................. 74
10-15 FESTIVALS & ANY OTHER FUNDRAISERS AS ACCESSORY TO EXISTING CHURCHES. ...... 74
10-15.1 Festivals, Bingo or any other Fund Raising Activity ....................................................................... 74
10-15.2 Temporary Tents used at Festival and other Fundraiser Activities ................................................. 74
10-15.3 Temporary Signs .............................................................................................................................. 74
11 TEMPORARY USES .................................................................................................................................... 74
11-1 AUTHORIZATION. ................................................................................................................................... 75
11-2 ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE AND
REVOCATION. .......................................................................................................................................... 75
11-2.1 Certificate Required. ............................................................................................................................ 75
11-3 USE LIMITATIONS. .................................................................................................................................. 75
11-3.1 General Limitations. ............................................................................................................................ 75
11-3.2 Hours and Days of Operation. ............................................................................................................ 75
11-3.3 Traffic. ................................................................................................................................................. 75
11-3.4 Conflicts With Other Temporary Uses. ................................................................................................ 75
11-3.5 Sign Limitations. .................................................................................................................................. 75
11-3.6 Parking. ............................................................................................................................................... 75
11-3.7 Additional Conditions. ......................................................................................................................... 76
11-4 PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES. .......................................................................................................... 76
11-4.1 House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales. ........................................................................................ 76
11-4.2 Outdoor Art, Craft and Plant Shows, Exhibits and Sales. ................................................................... 76
11-4.3 Christmas Tree Sales. .......................................................................................................................... 76
11-4.4 Contractor's Offices and Equipment Sheds. ........................................................................................ 76
11-4.5 Model Units, Including Real Estate Offices. ........................................................................................ 76
11-4.6 Festivals and Circuses. ........................................................................................................................ 76
11-4.7 Tents..................................................................................................................................................... 77
11-5 BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS. ....................................................................................................... 77
12 VEHICULAR USE AREAS .......................................................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
12-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................... 77
12-2 APPLICABILITY. ...................................................................................................................................... 78
12-2.1 New and Expanded Uses. .................................................................................................................... 78
12-2.2 Existing Uses. ...................................................................................................................................... 78
12-2.3 Maintenance. ....................................................................................................................................... 78
12-2.4 Plan Review. ........................................................................................................................................ 78
12-3 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES. ................................................................................... 78
12-3.1 Computation of Required Spaces. ........................................................................................................ 78
12-3.2 Spaces for the Handicapped. ............................................................................................................... 79
12-3.3 Shared Parking. ................................................................................................................................... 79
12-4 DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND AISLES. ...................................................................................... 79
12-4.1 Aisles. ................................................................................................................................................... 79
12-4.2 Access. ................................................................................................................................................. 79
12-4.3 Maneuverability Areas. ........................................................................................................................ 80
12-4.4 Handicapped Parking Spaces. ............................................................................................................. 80
12-4.5 Surface and Drainage. ......................................................................................................................... 80
12-4.6 Lighting. ............................................................................................................................................... 80
12-4.7 Wheel Stops and Continuous Curbs. ................................................................................................... 82
12-4.8 Slope. ................................................................................................................................................... 82
12-5 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES. ................................................................................... 83
12-5.1 Off-Street Parking. ............................................................................................................................... 83
12-5.2 Residential Parking. ............................................................................................................................ 83
12-5.3 Parking of Boat, Trailer, R.V. or Mobile Home. ................................................................................. 83
12-5.4 Parking of Inoperable or Abandoned Vehicles.................................................................................... 84
12-5.5 Traffic Patterns. ................................................................................................................................... 84
12-6 LANDSCAPING FOR VEHICULAR USE AREAS. ................................................................................. 84
12-6.1 Applicability. ........................................................................................................................................ 84
12-6.2 Total Landscaping Required................................................................................................................ 84
12-6.3 Interior Landscaping Standards. ......................................................................................................... 84
12-6.4 Determination of Interior Landscape Requirements. .......................................................................... 85
12-6.5 Overlap. ............................................................................................................................................... 85
12-6.6 Credit. .................................................................................................................................................. 85
12-6.7 Plant Installation and Maintenance Standards. .................................................................................. 86
12-6.8 Modifications. ...................................................................................................................................... 86
12-6.9 Authority ............................................................................................................................................... 86
12-7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING. ............................................................................................................................. 86
12-7.1 Height .................................................................................................................................................. 86
12-7.2 Illumination ......................................................................................................................................... 86
12-7.3 Shielding .............................................................................................................................................. 87
12-7.4 Color and Glare ................................................................................................................................... 87
12-7.5 Luminaire Type .................................................................................................................................... 87
12-7.6 Factors for Evaluation ......................................................................................................................... 87
12-7.7 Location ............................................................................................................................................... 87
12-8 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS. .......................................................................................... 87
12-8.1 Scope of Application. ........................................................................................................................... 87
12-8.2 Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required. ................................................................................. 87
12-8.3 General Standards. .............................................................................................................................. 88
12-9 VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD REQUIREMENTS. .............................................................................. 88
12-9.1 Minimum Setbacks. .............................................................................................................................. 88
12-9.2 Screening. ............................................................................................................................................ 88
13 SIGNS ............................................................................................................................................................. 92
13-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................... 93
13-2 SCOPE. ........................................................................................................................................................ 93
13-3 DEFINITION OF TERMS. .......................................................................................................................... 93
13-4 ZONING CERTIFICATE AND PERMITS. ................................................................................................ 97
13-4.1 Zoning Certificate Required. ............................................................................................................... 97
13-4.2 Exemptions. .......................................................................................................................................... 97
13-4.3 Nonconforming or Noncomplying Signs. ............................................................................................. 97
13-5 GENERAL STANDARDS. ......................................................................................................................... 98
13-5.1 Illumination. ........................................................................................................................................ 98
13-5.2 Height .................................................................................................................................................. 98
13-5.3 Minimum Setback. ............................................................................................................................... 99
13-5.4 Obstruction of Accessways. ................................................................................................................. 99
13-5.5 Traffic Safety. ....................................................................................................................................... 99
13-5.6 Signs in Rights-of-Way. ....................................................................................................................... 99
13-5.7 Sign Identification. ............................................................................................................................... 99
13-5.8 Sign Maintenance. ............................................................................................................................... 99
13-5.9 Sign Allotment, Maximum Size and Location. ..................................................................................... 99
13-6 SIGN MEASUREMENT ........................................................................................................................... 100
13-6.1 Area of a Freestanding Sign. ............................................................................................................. 100
13-6.2 Area of Building Signs. ...................................................................................................................... 100
13-6.3 Exceptions. ......................................................................................................................................... 100
13-7 SIGNS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS. ............................................... 104
13-8 PERMITTED SIGNS. ............................................................................................................................... 104
13-9 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS & EXEMPT FROM ZONING CERTIFICATES. 104
13-10 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ........................................................................... 105
13-10.1 Temporary Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 105
13-10.2 Permanent Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 105
13-10.3 Outdoor Advertising Signs. ............................................................................................................ 106
13-11 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE O OFFICE DISTRICT. ............................................................................. 106
13-11.1 Temporary Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 106
13-11.2 Freestanding Signs. ....................................................................................................................... 106
13-11.3 Building Signs. ............................................................................................................................... 106
13-11.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs. ............................................................................................................ 107
13-12 SIGNS PERMITTED IN E RETAIL DISTRICT. ..................................................................................... 107
13-12.1 Temporary Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 107
13-12.2 Portable or Movable Signs. ........................................................................................................... 107
13-12.3 Freestanding Signs. ....................................................................................................................... 107
13-12.4 Building Signs. ............................................................................................................................... 107
13-12.5 Outdoor Advertising Signs. ............................................................................................................ 108
13-13 SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS. ............................................................................. 108
13-13.1 Temporary Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 108
13-13.2 Freestanding Signs. ....................................................................................................................... 108
13-13.3 Building Signs. ............................................................................................................................... 108
13-13.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs. ............................................................................................................ 108
13-14 SECTION REMOVED FROM CODE
13-15 LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS. ........................................................................ 108
13-15.1 Submission of Regulations. ............................................................................................................ 108
13-15.2 Conditions for Approval. ............................................................................................................... 108
13-15.3 Application Procedure. .................................................................................................................. 109
13-15.4 Private Signage Agreements. ......................................................................................................... 109
13-15.5 Changes to Approved Localized Alternative Sign Regulations. .................................................... 109
13-16 BILLBOARDS (OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS). .......................................................................... 109
13-16.1 Zoning Certificate Required. ......................................................................................................... 109
13-16.2 Exemptions. .................................................................................................................................... 109
13-16.3 State Permit. .................................................................................................................................. 109
13-16.4 Standards for Billboards................................................................................................................ 109
13-16.5 General Spacing. ........................................................................................................................... 110
13-16.6 Buffer Spacing. .............................................................................................................................. 110
13-17 ENFORCEMENT. .................................................................................................................................... 110
13-17.1 Violations. ...................................................................................................................................... 110
13-17.2 Penalties for Violations. ................................................................................................................ 111
13-17.3 Revocation of Zoning Certificate/Sign. .......................................................................................... 111
14 BUFFER YARDS AND RESOURCE PROTECTION ............................................................................ 111
14-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 111
14-2 APPLICABILITY. .................................................................................................................................... 112
14-3 TYPES OF BUFFER YARDS. ................................................................................................................. 112
14-3.1 Boundary Buffer. ............................................................................................................................... 112
14-3.2 Streetscape Buffer. ............................................................................................................................. 112
14-4 PLAN REVIEW. ....................................................................................................................................... 112
14-5 MODIFICATIONS ANDWAIVERS. ...................................................................................................... 113
14-5.1 Authority ............................................................................................................................................ 113
14-6 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR BUFFER YARDS. ................................................................................ 113
14-6.1 Responsibility for Installation of Buffer. ............................................................................................ 113
14-6.2 Location. ............................................................................................................................................ 113
14-6.3 Structures Within Required Buffer. .................................................................................................... 113
14-6.4 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Same Owner. ........................................................................................ 113
14-6.5 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Different Owners. ................................................................................. 113
14-6.6 Existing Fence, Wall Berm or Landscaping on Adjacent Parcel. ..................................................... 113
14-6.7 Existing Development on Both Sides. ................................................................................................ 114
14-7 BOUNDARY BUFFER. ............................................................................................................................ 114
14-7.1 Procedure. ......................................................................................................................................... 114
14-7.2 Overlap. ............................................................................................................................................. 117
14-7.3 Credit. ................................................................................................................................................ 117
14-8 STREETSCAPE BUFFER. ....................................................................................................................... 117
14-8.1 General Standards. ............................................................................................................................ 117
14-8.2 Determination of Streetscape Buffer Requirements. .......................................................................... 118
14-9 CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE AT STREET AND ACCESS DRIVE INTERSECTIONS .......................... 121
14-9.1 Purpose. ............................................................................................................................................. 121
14-9.2 Definition. .......................................................................................................................................... 121
14-9.3 Design. ............................................................................................................................................... 121
14-9.4 Restrictions Within Clear Sight Triangles. ........................................................................................ 121
14-10 WOODLAND PRESERVATION. ........................................................................................................ 122
14-10.1 Quantity of Woodland. ................................................................................................................... 122
14-10.2 Location. ........................................................................................................................................ 122
14-10.3 Credit. ............................................................................................................................................ 122
14-11 RIPARIAN BUFFER AREA. ................................................................................................................ 122
14-11.1 Buffer Requirements. ..................................................................................................................... 122
14-11.2 Credit. ............................................................................................................................................ 122
15 GENERAL LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS .......................................................................... 122
15-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 123
15-2 STANDARDS FOR USE OFWALLS, FENCES OR BERMS. ................................................................ 123
15-2.1 Walls. ................................................................................................................................................. 123
15-2.2 Fences. ............................................................................................................................................... 123
15-2.3 Berms. ................................................................................................................................................ 123
15-2.4 Relationship of Plant Material with Wall or Fence. .......................................................................... 123
15-3 PLANT INSTALLATION STANDARDS. ............................................................................................... 124
15-3.1 Species of Plant Material. .................................................................................................................. 124
15-3.2 Quality and Installation. .................................................................................................................... 124
15-3.3 Size. .................................................................................................................................................... 124
15-4 SCREENS. ................................................................................................................................................. 124
15-4.1 Plant Material Height Requirements. ................................................................................................ 124
15-4.2 Planting Requirements. ...................................................................................................................... 124
15-4.3 Combination of Materials. ................................................................................................................. 125
15-4.4 Approved Plant List ........................................................................................................................... 125
15-5 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALL LANDSCAPEMATERIALS. ................................ 125
15-6 CREDIT FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPEMATERIALS. ........................................................................ 125
15-6.1 Trees. ................................................................................................................................................. 125
15-6.2 Shrubs. ............................................................................................................................................... 126
15-6.3 Protection During Construction. ....................................................................................................... 126
15-6.4 Credit for Fences, Walls, and Berms. ................................................................................................ 126
16 AMENDMENTS .......................................................................................................................................... 126
16-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 127
16-2 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 127
16-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO INITIATEAMENDMENTS. ......................................................................... 127
16-4 STANDARDS FORAMENDMENTS. ..................................................................................................... 127
16-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FORAMENDMENTS – PUBLIC MEETINGS AND HEARINGS
REQUIRED. .............................................................................................................................................. 128
16-5.1 Public Prehearing Conference. ......................................................................................................... 128
16-5.2 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 128
16-5.3 Schedule of RPC Meeting and RZC Hearing. .................................................................................... 128
16-5.4 Staff Recommendation. ...................................................................................................................... 128
16-5.5 Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Recommendation. ............................................................ 133
16-5.6 Board of Township Trustees Action. .................................................................................................. 129
16-6 REFERENDUM. ....................................................................................................................................... 129
16-6.1 Petition Time Limit. ........................................................................................................................... 129
16-6.2 Petition Signatures............................................................................................................................. 129
16-6.3 Petition Content. ................................................................................................................................ 129
16.6-4 Effect of Referendum. ......................................................................................................................... 129
16-7 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS. ........................................................................ 129
16-7.1 Published Notice. ............................................................................................................................... 129
16-7.2 Mailed Notice..................................................................................................................................... 130
16-7.3 Content of Published and Mailed Notices. ........................................................................................ 130
16-8 APPEAL OF DECISION. .......................................................................................................................... 130
17 CONDITIONAL USES ............................................................................................................................... 130
17-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 131
17-2 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 131
17-3 EFFECT OF CONDITIONAL USE LISTING. ......................................................................................... 131
17-3.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements. ............................................................................................ 131
17-3.2 Compliance with Other Requirements. .............................................................................................. 131
17-4 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATIONS. ................................................ 131
17-4.1 Applicant. ........................................................................................................................................... 131
17-4.2 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 131
17-4.3 Scheduling of Hearing and Transmittal of Application. .................................................................... 132
17-4.4 Staff Report. ....................................................................................................................................... 132
17-4.5 Notice and Hearing. .......................................................................................................................... 132
17-4.6 Decision. ............................................................................................................................................ 132
17-4.7 Notification of Decision. .................................................................................................................... 132
17-5 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS. ................................................... 132
17-5.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals. .............................................................................. 132
17-5.2 Procedures and Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. ....................................................................... 132
17-6 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES. ............................................................. 133
17-7 SPECIFIC CRITERIA PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES. ........................................................ 133
17-8 ACCESSORY USES TO CONDITIONAL USES. ................................................................................... 134
17-9 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES. ....................................... 135
17-9.1 Additional Conditions. ....................................................................................................................... 135
17-9.2 Effect of Approval of Conditional Use. .............................................................................................. 135
17-9.3 Certification Of Conditional Use Plan Compliance. ......................................................................... 135
17-9.4 Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions. .......................................................................................... 135
17-9.5 Limitations on Conditional Use Approval. ........................................................................................ 136
17-9.6 Amendments to Conditional Uses. ..................................................................................................... 136
17-10 PERIOD OF VALIDITY. ...................................................................................................................... 136
17-11 APPEAL OF DECISION. ...................................................................................................................... 136
18 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT AND PUD REVIEW
PROCEDURES ............................................................................................................................................ 145
18-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 147
18-2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY. ............................................................................ 147
18-3 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 147
18-3.1 Approval of PUD-1 Applications. ...................................................................................................... 147
18-3.2 Approval of PUD-2 Applications. ...................................................................................................... 147
18-3.3 Approval of Modifications of Specific Requirements. ........................................................................ 147
18-4 EFFECT OF PUD LISTING. ..................................................................................................................... 147
18-4.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements. ............................................................................................ 147
18-4.2 Compliance with Other Requirements. .............................................................................................. 148
18-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR PUD PLANS. ........................................................................................... 148
18-5.1 Pre-application Conference. .............................................................................................................. 148
18-5.2 Applicant. ........................................................................................................................................... 148
18-5.3 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 148
18-5.4 Staff Report. ....................................................................................................................................... 148
18-5.5 Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Hearing and Decision. ................................................... 148
18-5.6 Notification of Decision. .................................................................................................................... 148
18-5.7 Board of Township Trustees Hearing and Decision on PUD-2 Application. .................................... 149
18-5.8 Effect of PUD Plan Approval. ........................................................................................................... 149
18-5.9 Period of Validity. .......................................................................................................................... 149
18-6 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS. ................................................... 149
18-6.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals. .............................................................................. 149
18-6.2 Procedures and Action. ..................................................................................................................... 149
18-7 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PUD PLAN APPROVAL. .................................................................... 149
18-8 ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN -- CERTIFICATION OF PUD PLAN COMPLIANCE. ...................... 150
18-8.1 Review. ............................................................................................................................................... 150
18-8.2 Conveyance. ....................................................................................................................................... 150
18-8.3 Decision. ............................................................................................................................................ 150
18-8.4 Effect. ................................................................................................................................................. 150
18-9 ADJUSTMENTS TO PUD PLAN. ............................................................................................................ 150
18-9.1 Minor Adjustments. ............................................................................................................................ 151
18-9.2 Major Adjustments. ............................................................................................................................ 151
18-10 APPEALS. ............................................................................................................................................. 151
18-10.1 Appeal of Sycamore Township Zoning Commission Decision. ..................................................... 151
18-10.2 Appeal of Administrative Official’s Decision. ............................................................................... 151
18-10.3 Appeal of Board of Township Trustees Decision. .......................................................................... 151
19 DECISION MAKING/ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS ............................................ 150
19-1 BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES. .................................................................................................... 152
19-2 ZONING COMMISSION. ......................................................................................................................... 151
19-2.1 Membership. ...................................................................................................................................... 151
19-2.2 Jurisdiction and Authority. ................................................................................................................ 151
19-2.3 Officers. ............................................................................................................................................. 152
19-2.4 Meetings; Records. ............................................................................................................................ 152
19-2.5 Quorum and Vote. .............................................................................................................................. 152
19-2.6 Conflicts. ............................................................................................................................................ 153
19-3 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. ............................................................................................................ 154
19-3.1 Membership. ...................................................................................................................................... 154
19-3.3 Jurisdiction and Authority. ................................................................................................................ 154
19-3.4 Officers. ............................................................................................................................................. 154
19-3.5 Minutes; Records. .............................................................................................................................. 154
19-3.6 Quorum and Vote. .............................................................................................................................. 154
19-3.7 Conflicts. ............................................................................................................................................ 154
19-4 ZONING INSPECTOR. ............................................................................................................................ 155
19-5 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. ............................................................................................................. 155
20 ZONING CERTIFICATES, GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND FEES ..................... 155
20-1 ZONING CERTIFICATE. ......................................................................................................................... 157
20-1.1 Application for Zoning Certificate. .................................................................................................... 157
20-1.2 Zoning Compliance Plan. .................................................................................................................. 157
20-1.3 Fee. .................................................................................................................................................... 157
20-1.4 Period of Validity. .............................................................................................................................. 157
20-2 GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES. .......................................................................................... 158
20-2.1 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 158
20-2.2 Determination of Completeness of Any Application. ......................................................................... 158
20-2.3 Effect of Determination. ..................................................................................................................... 158
20-3 FEES. ......................................................................................................................................................... 158
20-4 ZONE DISTRICT CERTIFICATION. ...................................................................................................... 158
21 VARIANCES ............................................................................................................................................... 157
21-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 159
21-2 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 159
21-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK VARIANCES. ..................................................................................... 159
21-4 PROCEDURE. .......................................................................................................................................... 159
21-4.1 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 159
21-4.2 Public Hearing. ................................................................................................................................. 159
21-4.3 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. .................................................................................................. 159
21-4.4 Special Procedures in Connection with Other Applications. ............................................................ 159
21-5 AUTHORIZED VARIANCES. ................................................................................................................. 159
21-5.1 Permitted Variances. ......................................................................................................................... 159
21-6 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES. .......................................................................................................... 160
21-6.1 General Standard. ............................................................................................................................. 160
21-6.2 Unique Physical Condition. ............................................................................................................... 160
21-6.3 Not Self-Created. ............................................................................................................................... 160
21-6.4 Denied Substantial Rights. ................................................................................................................. 160
21-6.5 Not Merely Special Privilege. ............................................................................................................ 160
21-6.6 Resolution Purposes. ......................................................................................................................... 160
21-6.7 Essential Character of the Area......................................................................................................... 160
21-7 VARIANCE LESS THAN REQUESTED. ................................................................................................ 161
21-8 CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES. ............................................................................................................ 161
21-9 EFFECT OF GRANT OF VARIANCE. .................................................................................................... 161
21-10 LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCES. ...................................................................................................... 161
22 APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ........................................................................... 160
22-1 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 162
22-2 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 162
22-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO APPEAL. ........................................................................................................ 162
22-4 PROCEDURE. .......................................................................................................................................... 162
22-4.1 Notice of Appeal. ............................................................................................................................... 162
22-4.2 Fees. ................................................................................................................................................... 162
22-4.3 Stay of Proceeding. ............................................................................................................................ 162
22-4.4 Public Hearing Notice. ...................................................................................................................... 162
22-4.5 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. .................................................................................................. 163
22-5 RIGHT TO GRANT VARIANCE IN DECIDING APPEALS. ................................................................. 163
22-6 APPEAL OF DECISION. .......................................................................................................................... 163
23 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS ............................................................................................ 162
23-1 AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................................................... 164
23-2 PURPOSE. ................................................................................................................................................. 164
23-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK INTERPRETATIONS. ........................................................................ 164
23-4 PROCEDURE. .......................................................................................................................................... 164
23-4.1 Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 164
23-4.2 Action on Application. ....................................................................................................................... 164
23-4.3 Appeal. ............................................................................................................................................... 165
23-5 STANDARDS FOR USE INTERPRETATIONS. .................................................................................... 165
23-6 EFFECT OF FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS. ........................................................................ 165
23-7 LIMITATIONS ON FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS. ............................................................ 165
23-8 APPEALS FROMADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS. ............................................................................ 165
23-8.1 Procedure. ......................................................................................................................................... 165
24 ENFORCEMENT ........................................................................................................................................ 164
24-1 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS. ....................................................................................... 166
24-2 PERSONS LIABLE. .................................................................................................................................. 166
24-3 PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS. ...................................................................... 166
24-3.1 Written Notice .................................................................................................................................... 166
24-3.2 Final Written Notice .......................................................................................................................... 166
24-3.3 Citation .............................................................................................................................................. 166
24-3.4 Emergency Enforcement .................................................................................................................... 166
24-4 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS. ............................................................................. 166
24-4.1 Civil Penalty and Appeals ................................................................................................................. 166
24-4.2 Other Enforcement Actions ................................................................................................................ 167
24-4.3 Multiple Citations .............................................................................................................................. 167
24-4.4 Multiple Remedies. ............................................................................................................................ 167
24-5 ZONING CERTIFICATE REVOCATION. .............................................................................................. 167
24-5.1 Grounds for Revocation. .................................................................................................................... 167
24-5.2 Procedure. ......................................................................................................................................... 167
24-5.3 Notice. ................................................................................................................................................ 167
24-5.4 Effect of Revocation. .......................................................................................................................... 167
24-6 JUDICIAL REVIEW. ................................................................................................................................ 165
A
ABUTTING ............................................................................................................................................................ 2-8
ACCESSORY APARTMENT ............................................................................................................................... 2-8
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE ................................................................................................................. 2-8
ADJUSTMENT (OF PLANS) ............................................................................................................................... 2-8
ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES ............................................................................................................................ 19-1
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL ........................................................................................................................... 2-8
AGGRIEVED PARTY OR PERSON .................................................................................................................... 2-8
AGRICULTURE, RURAL .................................................................................................................................... 2-9
AGRICULTURE, SUBURBAN ............................................................................................................................ 2-9
B
BAR ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2-9
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA) .............................................................................................................. 2-9
BOARD. ................................................................................................................................................................. 2-9
BOARDING HOUSE ............................................................................................................................................. 2-9
BUFFER OR BUFFERYARD ............................................................................................................................... 2-9
BUFFER, BOUNDARY ...................................................................................................................................... 2-10
BUILDABLE AREA ............................................................................................................................................ 2-10
BUILDING ........................................................................................................................................................... 2-10
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF .................................................................................................................................... 2-10
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL .................................................................................................................................... 2-10
BULK ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-10
C
CALIPER ............................................................................................................................................................. 2-10
CEMETERY ......................................................................................................................................................... 2-10
CHURCH / PLACE OF WORSHIP ..................................................................................................................... 2-10
CLINIC, MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR OPTICAL ................................................................................................. 2-10
CLUB ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-11
CLUB, PRIVATE ................................................................................................................................................. 2-11
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY ............................................................................................................................ 2-11
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY ............................................................................................................................... 2-11
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE ................................................................................................................................... 2-11
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL BUSINESS (SALES AND SERVICES) .................................................................. 2-11
COMPOST BIN ................................................................................................................................................... 2-11
CONDITIONAL USE .......................................................................................................................................... 2-11
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY ............................................................................................ 2-11
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY ............................................................................................................................ 2-11
CULTURAL FACILITY ...................................................................................................................................... 2-11
D
DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD ........................................................................................................................... 2-11
DAY CARE, ADULT .......................................................................................................................................... 2-11
DECIBELS .............................................................................................................................................. 5-1, 6-1, 7-1
DECISION MAKING .......................................................................................................................................... 19-1
DEED OF ACCEPTANCE .................................................................................................................................... 7-6
DENSITY, GROSS .............................................................................................................................................. 2-12
DENSITY, NET ................................................................................................................................................... 2-12
DEVELOPER ....................................................................................................................................................... 2-12
DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................................................................. 2-12
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY ........................................................................................................ 2-12
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) ....................................................................................................... 2-12
DISTRICT, ZONING ........................................................................................................................................... 2-12
DORMITORY ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
DRAINAGEWAY ................................................................................................................................................ 2-13
DRIP LINE ........................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
DRIVE, ENTRY................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
DRIVE, PRIVATE ............................................................................................................................................... 2-13
DRIVEWAY ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-13
DWELLING ......................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
DWELLING UNIT .............................................................................................................................................. 2-13
E
EASEMENT ......................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
EASEMENT OF ACCESS ................................................................................................................................... 2-13
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE) .............................................................................. 2-13
EFFECTIVE DATE ............................................................................................................................................. 2-13
EFFECTIVE DATE, INITIAL ............................................................................................................................. 2-13
EQUINE ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-13
F
FAMILY ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-14
FAMILY HOME .................................................................................................................................................. 2-14
FARM MARKET ................................................................................................................................................. 2-14
FESTIVAL, TEMPORARY ................................................................................................................................. 2-14
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION .............................................................................................................................. 2-14
FLOOD FRINGE ................................................................................................................................................. 2-14
FLOODPLAIN ..................................................................................................................................................... 2-14
FLOODWAY ....................................................................................................................................................... 2-14
FLOOR ................................................................................................................................................................. 2-14
FLOOR AREA, GROSS ...................................................................................................................................... 2-15
FOOT-CANDLE .................................................................................................................................................. 2-15
FOREST ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-15
FRONTAGE, BUILDING ................................................................................................................................... 2-15
G
GARAGE, PRIVATE ........................................................................................................................................... 2-15
GOVERNMENT FACILITY ............................................................................................................................... 2-15
GRADE ................................................................................................................................................................ 2-15
GREENHOUSE ................................................................................................................................................... 2-15
GROUP HOME .................................................................................................................................................... 2-15
H
HALFWAY HOUSE ............................................................................................................................................ 2-16
HANDICAP ......................................................................................................................................................... 2-16
HOBBY BREEDER ............................................................................................................................................. 2-16
HOME OCCUPATION ........................................................................................................................................ 2-16
HOSPITAL ........................................................................................................................................................... 2-16
HOTEL OR MOTEL ............................................................................................................................................ 2-17
HOUSEHOLD PET ENCLOSURES ................................................................................................................... 3-13
HOUSEHOLD PETS ........................................................................................................................................... 3-13
I
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR) ............................................................................................................ 2-17
INDUSTRIAL USE.............................................................................................................................................. 2-17
INDUSTRIAL, EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION USE ....................................................................................... 2-17
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY ...................................................................................................................................... 2-17
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT ........................................................................................................................................ 2-17
INDUSTRIAL, SOLID WASTE FACILITY ...................................................................................................... 2-17
INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT (MODULAR) ........................................................................................................... 2-17
J
JUNK VEHICLE .................................................................................................................................................. 2-18
K
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL……………………………………………………………………………………………………
KENNEL, PRIVATE……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
L
LAKE ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-18
LAKE, COMMERCIAL FISHING/PAY LAKE ................................................................................................. 2-18
LANDFILL, CAPTIVE ........................................................................................................................................ 2-18
LANDFILL, CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION ................................................................................................ 2-18
LANDFILL, SOLID WASTE .............................................................................................................................. 2-18
LANDSCAPING .................................................................................................................................................. 2-18
LIGHT, CUTOFF ................................................................................................................................................. 2-18
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR ..................................................................................................................................... 2-18
LIVESTOCK ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-19
LOT ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LOT LINE, FRONT ............................................................................................................................................. 2-19
LOT LINE, REAR ................................................................................................................................................ 2-19
LOT LINE, SIDE ................................................................................................................................................. 2-19
LOT LINES .......................................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LOT OF RECORD ............................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LOT WIDTH ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-19
LOT, CORNER .................................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LOT, DEPTH ....................................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LOT, DEVELOPED ............................................................................................................................................. 2-19
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE .............................................................................................................................. 2-19
LOT, INTERIOR .................................................................................................................................................. 2-19
LOT, PANHANDLE ............................................................................................................................................ 2-19
LOT, REVERSE ................................................................................................................................................... 2-19
LUMINAIRE ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-19
M
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK .................................................................................................................... 2-20
MARINA .............................................................................................................................................................. 2-20
MARINAS .............................................................................................................................................................. 7-2
MOBILE HOME PARK ...................................................................................................................................... 2-20
MODIFICATION (OF STANDARDS) ............................................................................................................... 2-20
MODULAR HOME ............................................................................................................................................ 2-20
MOORING OR FLOAT ....................................................................................................................................... 2-20
N
NATURAL RESOURCES ................................................................................................................................... 2-20
NAVIGABLE STREAM ...................................................................................................................................... 2-20
NOISE ..................................................................................................................................................... 5-1, 6-1, 7-1
NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE ..................................................................................................................... 2-21
NONCONFORMING USE .................................................................................................................................. 2-21
NURSERY ........................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME ........................................................................................................ 2-21
O
OFFICIALS .......................................................................................................................................................... 19-1
OPEN SPACE ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
OUTDOOR STORAGE ......................................................................................................................................... 5-1
OWNER ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
P
PARCEL ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PARK ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY ............................................................................................................................ 2-21
PARKING LOT ................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PARKING SPACE ............................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PATIO AREA ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PATIO DWELLING .............................................................................................................................................. 4-3
PERSON ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
PET, HOUSEHOLD............................................................................................................................................. 2-21
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) ....................................................................................................... 2-22
POND ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-22
PRINCIPAL USE ................................................................................................................................................. 2-22
PROJECT AREA ................................................................................................................................................. 2-22
PUBLIC SERVICE .............................................................................................................................................. 2-22
PUD ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2-22
PUD PLAN ............................................................................................................................................................. 7-6
PUD PLAN (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN) ................................................................................ 2-22
R
RECORDING ......................................................................................................................................................... 7-6
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL ........................................................................................................................ 2-22
RECREATION, COMMUNITY FACILITY, PUBLIC ...................................................................................... 2-23
RECYCLING FACILITY .................................................................................................................................... 2-23
RESEARCH LABORATORY ............................................................................................................................. 2-23
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Corner Lots ........................................................ 4-1
Double Frontage ................................................ 4-1
Front Yard Requirements on Corner Lots ......... 4-1
Front Yard Setback Alignment with Adjacent Lots4-1
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY ................................................................................................................................. 2-23
RESIDENTIAL USE ............................................................................................................................................ 2-23
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED ............................................................................................. 2-23
RIVER ACTIVITIES ........................................................................................................................................... 2-24
RIVER TERMINAL USES .................................................................................................................................. 2-24
S
SANITARY LANDFILL ..................................................................................................................................... 2-24
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA .......................................................................................................................... 2-24
SCREEN ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-24
SECRETARY/EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR .......................................................................................................... 2-24
SHOOTING GALLERY ...................................................................................................................................... 2-24
SHOPPING CENTER .......................................................................................................................................... 2-24
SHRUB ................................................................................................................................................................. 2-25
SHRUBS, BLOOMING ....................................................................................................................................... 2-25
SHRUBS, HEDGE ............................................................................................................................................... 2-25
SIGN ..................................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
SIGNS
Definition Of Terms
Building Signs .............................................................................................................................................. 13-1
Freestanding Signs ........................................................................................................................................ 13-1
Miscellaneous Signs ......................................................................................................... 13-2, 13-3, 13-4, 13-5
Temporary Signs........................................................................................................................................... 13-2
Sight Distance ............................................................................................................................................... 13-6
SOLID WASTE ................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST (SPI) OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Natural Resource Districts .................................................................................................................................. 8-3
Neighborhood Quality Districts .......................................................................................................................... 8-4
Suburban Center/Corridor Districts .................................................................................................................... 8-5
Suburban Village Districts.................................................................................................................................. 8-5
STABLE ............................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
STADIUM ............................................................................................................................................................ 2-25
STEEP SLOPES ................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
STORY ................................................................................................................................................................. 2-25
STORY, HALF .................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
STREAM .............................................................................................................................................................. 2-25
STREET, COLLECTOR ...................................................................................................................................... 2-26
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL ........................................................................................................................... 2-25
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL ........................................................................................................................... 2-26
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION .......................................................................................................................... 2-26
STRUCTURE ....................................................................................................................................................... 2-26
SUMMER CAMP ................................................................................................................................................ 2-26
T
TEMPORARY USE ............................................................................................................................................. 2-26
TERMINAL, TRUCK .......................................................................................................................................... 2-26
THEATER, MOVIE AND DRAMA, INDOOR .................................................................................................. 2-26
THOROUGHFARE PLAN .................................................................................................................................. 2-26
TRAILER, LIVESTOCK ..................................................................................................................................... 2-27
TRANSFER STATION ........................................................................................................................................ 2-27
TREE, UNDERSTORY ....................................................................................................................................... 2-27
TREES, CANOPY ............................................................................................................................................... 2-27
TREES, EVERGREEN ........................................................................................................................................ 2-27
U
USE ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2-27
V
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL ................................................................................................................................ 2-27
VEHICLE, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED ................................................................................................. 2-27
VEHICLE, OPERABLE UNLICENSED ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY ..................................................... 2-27
VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD ....................................................................................................................... 2-27
VETERINARY FACILITY ................................................................................................................................. 2-27
W
WAREHOUSING ................................................................................................................................................ 2-28
WATERCOURSE ................................................................................................................................................ 2-28
WATERWAY ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-28
WETLANDS ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-28
WHOLESALE ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-28
Y
YARD ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-28
YARD, FRONT .................................................................................................................................................... 2-28
YARD, REAR ...................................................................................................................................................... 2-28
YARD, REQUIRED ............................................................................................................................................. 2-28
YARD, SIDE ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-29
Z
ZONING CERTIFICATES .................................................................................................................................. 2-29
ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN ........................................................................................................................ 2-29

APPENDIX 1: ILLUSTRATION OF LOT, YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
BUILDABLE AND NON-BUILDABLE
AREAS
REAR YARDS ON CORNER LOTS
REAR YARD OPTION 1 REAR YARD OPTION 2
On corner lots the rear yard is generally considered to be parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its least dimension as depicted in “Rear
Yard Option 1”. However, the rear yard may be approved parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension, if the minimum
distance from the structure to the rear property line complies with the
minimum rear yard setback required in the zone district as depicted in
“Rear Yard Option 2”.
LOT TYPES CELLAR, BASEMENT, AND STORY
MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING HEIGHTS BY ROOF TYPE
Building Height is measured as the vertical distance from the average grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs excluding elevator shafts, chimneys and other structures.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 1
APPENDIX 2: RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIAL LIST
Recommended Canopy Trees
Botanical/Common Name Height at
Maturity
Acer rubrum (Red Maple) 65’
Acer saccharum (Sugar Maple) 90’
Fraxinus americana ‘Rosehill’ (Rosehill Ash) 90’
Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘Marshall’s Seedless (Marshall’s Seedless Ash) 80’
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis ‘Shademaster’ (Shademaster Honeylocust) 70’
Quercus rubra (Red Oak) 90’
Tilia cordata (Littleleaf Linden) 60’
Ulmus hollandica (New Dutch Elm) 70’
Fraxinus quadrangulata (blue ash) 80’
Acer saccharinum (silver maple) 90’
Tiliaceae americana (American Basswood) 75’
Ulmaceae americana (American Elm) 120’
Carya cordiformis (Bitternut Hickory) 100’
Fagus grandifolia (American Beech) 90’
Quercus macrocarpa (Bur Oak) 70’
Recommended Understory Trees
Botanical/Common Name Height at
Maturity
Amelanchier laevis (Allegheny Serviceberry) 30’
Crataegus species (Hawthorne) 15-28’
Koelreutaria paniculata/Goldenraintree) 30’
Malus species & cultivars (Crabapple) 10-30’
Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’ (Aristocrat Pear) 30’
Viburnum prunifolium L. (Blackhaw) 10-20’
Aesculus glabra Wild. (Ohio Buckeye) 30’
Ginko biloba (Ginko) 20-30’
Cornus alternifolia (Alternate Leaf Dogwood) 20-30’
Asimina triloba (Paw Paw) 15-20’
Recommended Evergreen Trees
Botanical/Common Name Height at
Maturity
Picea abies (Norway Spruce) 90’
Pinus nigra (Austrian Pine) 80’
Pinus strobus (White Pine) 100’
Larix deciduas (European Larch) 70-75’
Picea glauca (White Spruce) 50’
Junperus virginiana (Eastern Redcedar) 35’
Pinus virginiana (Virginia Pine) 35-45’
Recommended Deciduous Shrubs
Botanical/Common Name Height at
Maturity
Forsythia intermedia (Border Forsythia) 8’
Hamamelis virginiana (Common Witchhazel) 12’
Hydrangea quercifolia (oakleaf Hydrangea) 5’
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 2
APPENDIX 2: RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIAL LIST
Ligustrum obtusifolium regelianum (Regal Privet) 6’
Lonicera fragrantissima (Winer Honeysuckle) 10’
Myrica pennsylvanica (Northern Bayberry) 12’
Spiraea vanhouttei (Vanhoutte Spirea) 6’
Viburnum dentatum (Arrowwood Viburnum) 8’
Viburnum prunifolium (Blackhaw Viburnum) 10’
Salix discolor (Pussy Willow) 15-20’
Festiva maxima (Peony) 3-5’
Recommended Evergreen Shrubs
Botanical/Common Name Height at
Maturity
Juniperus pfitzeriana (Pfitzer Juniper) 8’
Taxus media ‘densiformis (Dense Yew) 4’
Taxus media ‘Hicksii’ (Hick’s Yew) 10’
Thuja occidentalis ‘woodardi’ (Arborvitae) 5’
Kalmia latifolia (Mountain Laurel) 5-10’
Tamarix chinensis Lour. (Saltcedar) 18’
Ilex opaca Ait. (American Holly) 10’
Elaeagnus commutata (Silverberry) 5-10’
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 3
APPENDIX 3: GUIDELINES
I. AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINES (ATM’S)
The specifications for the ATM should achieve the public interest in safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, visibility, convenience, identification, community character and proper integration with the surrounding area
through acceptable compliance with the following standards:
A. Size
Will not exceed maximum 8 ft. length, 3 ft. width, 8 ft. height.
B. Location
The location of such drive-in and/or walk-up ATM will be so designed that it will not interfere with the
circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the surrounding parking lot or the adjoining streets, alleys, or
sidewalks.
C. Signage
Will not exceed maximum 15% of surface area positioned on the structure (name & logo)
D. Lighting
Will utilize existing lighting plan, and supplemented only with self contained operational/security lighting.
E. Stacking & Circulation
Will provide minimum of four spaces designed to not prohibit use of required parking.
F. Number of Stations
Will not exceed maximum of one per Planned District.
G. Parking
Will maintain parking requirements for the existing district.
II. MONUMENT SIGNS IDENTIFYING FREESTANDING BUILDINGS
The specifications for the monument sign should achieve the public interest in safe movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, visibility, convenience, identification, community character and proper integration with the
surrounding area through acceptable compliance with the following standards:
A. Size
Will not exceed maximum of 30 sq. ft. (per side), 10 ft. length, 3ft. height.
B. Location
Will be at least 10 feet from any right-of-way and located and designed so that it will not interfere with the
circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the surrounding parking lot or the adjoining streets, alleys, or
sidewalks; will be located within 12 inches of ground level or on mounds of 12 inches or less.
C. Lighting
Will utilize enclosed lighting or an exterior lighting source of size and location which does not glare on
adjacent lots, businesses, or streets.
D. Number of Signs
Will not exceed maximum of one sign per freestanding building.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 4
APPENDIX 3: GUIDELINES
III. OUTSIDE LIGHTING
A. Height Range by Activity Level*
low: 10 ft. to 16 ft. medium: 10 ft. to 24 ft. high: 10 ft. to 32 ft.
(also should not exceed permitted building height)
B. Average Illuminance by Activity Level*
low: 1.0 footcandle medium: 2.0 footcandle high: 3.0 fc
C. Maximum Illumination (footcandles) by Activity Level*
low: 5.0 footcandle medium: 10.0 footcandle high: 15.0 footcandle
D. Uniformity of Illumination (maximum/minimum footcandle ratio)
should not exceed 15:1
E. Illumination of Access Drive
should not exceed average footcandles maintained at adjacent public road
F. Color Rendition
G. Metal Halide or Quartz Incandescent Luminaires should be used where color quality may affect the public
interest.
(1) High Pressure Sodium Luminaries should only be used where cost and energy efficiency are essential and
color quality will not adversely affect the public interest.
(2) Mercury Vapor and Low Pressure Sodium Luminaries are unacceptable if within public view.
H. Glare Control
(1) All outdoor lighting for non-residential uses should be located, screened, or shielded so adjacent lots in
residential districts are not directly illuminated.
(2) No outdoor lighting should be of such an intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of
drivers, pedestrians, employees or neighbors.
(3) Perimeter lighting should be a cut-off (“shoe box” type) fixture that results in not more than .5 footcandle
at adjacent residential property lines.
NOTES:
*Examples of Activity Levels for Open Parking Facilities
High: Regional shopping centers, motorist services at expressway interchanges, major league athletic facilities, major
cultural or civic facilities, airports
Medium: Community shopping centers, multi-family dwellings, office parks, hospitals, commuter lots, community facilities
(cultural, civic, recreational)
Low: Neighborhood shopping centers, educational facilities, churches, local commercial and industrial uses.
IV. CONTINUOUS OUTSIDE STORAGE OF MERCHANDISE AT SELF-SERVICE
GASOLINE/CONVENIENCE STORE FACILITIES
The specifications for outside storage should achieve the public interest in safe movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, visibility, convenience identification, community character and proper integration with the
surrounding area through acceptable compliance with the following standards:
A. Location
(1) Outside storage should comply with all required building setbacks.
(2) No outside storage should be permitted directly in front of the building (i.e., pedestrian or vehicular access
(3) Outside storage areas should only be permitted at each end of each pump island; areas between pumps
should be retained for customer circulation.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 5
APPENDIX 3: GUIDELINES
(4) Remove locations should be permitted when in compliance with item A above, and when effectively
screened and landscaped.
(5) Outside storage should be located so that the dispensing area is at all times in clear view of the attendant
and so such storage does not create any obstacle between the dispensing area and the attendant control
area.
B. Size
(1) Outside storage should be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the building interior sales floor area
measured in square feet.
(2) A maximum of ten (10) sq. ft. should be permitted at the end of each pump island and no higher than the
pump nozzle receptacle.
(3) No single outside storage area should contain more than fifty (50) percent of the square footage allowable.
C. Advertising
(1) Advertising of merchandise located in outside storage areas should be contained within the cubic area of
the allowable outside storage space.
(2) Vehicles should not be part of the outside storage display nor be part of the advertising associated with
such display of merchandise.
V. SEASONAL OUTSIDE STORAGE OF MERCHANDISE
The specifications for outside storage should achieve the public interest in safe movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, visibility, convenience, identification, community character and proper integration with the
surrounding area through acceptable compliance with the following standards:
A. Duration
(1) The Final Development Plan should specify that a zoning certificate for a temporary use is required prior to
each seasonal merchandise display. Dates of initiation and termination of the temporary use should be
specified on the Final Development Plan.
B. Parking
(1) The parking lot for the principal use (excluding any spaces to be used for outside display area) should
provide one parking space for each 20 square feet of outside display are in addition to complying with
minimal parking requirements for the principal use.
(2) Parking spaces should not be utilized as display areas if the parking spaces are necessary to comply with
the minimum parking requirements for indoor or outdoor retail areas.
(3) Outdoor merchandise areas in retail centers should not encroach into the required parking spaces provided
for either the principal or adjacent retail uses in the common parking lot.
C. Location
(1) Outside merchandise area locations should comply with all required building setbacks. Therefore, no
outside storage should be closer that fifty (50) feet to any street line or closer than thirty-five (35) feet to
any other boundary line of the tract that abuts a more restricted district.
(2) No outside storage should be permitted directly in front of the building (i.e., pedestrian or vehicular access
areas).
(3) Location of outdoor merchandise area in the parking lot area should not impede safe pedestrian or traffic
circulation.
D. Advertising
(1) Temporary signs should be contained within the permitted display area and should not exceed the height of
the displayed merchandise.
(2) Advertising of merchandise should not be displayed on vehicles.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 6
APPENDIX 4: PETITION FOR ZONING REFERENDUM
(see Ohio Revised Code Section 3501)
The form of a petition calling for a zoning referendum and the statement of the circulator shall be in substantially
the following form:
"PETITION FOR ZONING REFERENDUM"
(if the proposal is identified by a particular name or number, or both, these should be inserted here).
A proposal to amend the zoning map of the area of Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio, adopted
(date) (followed by a brief summary of the proposal).
To the Board of Township Trustees of Sycamore Township, Hamilton County, Ohio:
We, the undersigned, being electors residing in the Township, included within the Township Zoning Plan,
equal to not less than eight per cent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor in the area at the preceding
general election at which the governor was elected, request the Board of Township Trustees to submit this
amendment of the zoning resolution to electors of the Township, residing within the Township included in the
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution, for approval or rejection at a special election to be held on the day of the
next primary or general election to be held on _____(date)_____ pursuant to Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
Signature Street Township Precinct County
STATEMENT OF CIRCULATOR
 (name of circulator) declares under penalty of election falsification that (s)he is an elector
of the state of Ohio and resides at the address appearing below his/her signature hereto; that (s)he is the circulator of
the foregoing part petition containing (number) signatures; that (s)he witnessed the affixing of every signature; that
all signers were to the best of his/her knowledge and belief qualified to sign; and that every signature is to the best
of his/her knowledge and belief the signature of the person whose signature it purports to be.

Signature of circulator
Address
City/village/township, zip code
“THE PENALTY FOR ELECTION FALSIFICATION IS IMPRISONMENT FOR NOT MORE THAN SIX
MONTHS, OR A FINE OF NOT MORE THAN ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS, OR BOTH.”
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 7
APPENDIX 5: APPLICATION FORMS
ZONING COMMISSION
1. Special Public Interest - Strategy
ZONING COMMISSION
1. ZONING CERTIFICATES
(a) Permitted use
(b) Redevelopment Exception
(c) Temporary Use
(d) PUD Compliance Plan
(e) BZA Compliance Plan
(f) Non-conforming use
(g) Compatible non-conforming use
2. MAP AMENDMENTS
(a) Single letter rezone (Legislative)
(b) PUD-1 (Administrative)
(c) PUD-2 (Administrative)
(d) Special Public Interest (Legislative)
(e) Specific Plan-PUD (Legislative)
3. ADMINISTRATIVE
(a) PUD Minor Adjustment
(b) PUD Major Adjustment
(c) PUD Modification
(d) SPI Modification
(e) Landscape Modification
(f) Waiver of buffer yards
(g) Landscape & Buffer Credits
(h) Administrative Interpretation
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
1. APPEALS
2. VARIANCES
3. CONDITIONAL USES
4. COMPATIBLE NON-CONFORMING
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 8
APPENDIX 6: GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
I. Community Unit Plan Overlay District
A. The location and planning of building sites and the amount, arrangement and treatment of open space
will ensure a satisfactory living environment and should be carried out in consideration of property
adjacent to the area included in the plan and insure that such adjacent property will not be adversely
affected.
B. The plan should further the best use of the land in relation to its size, configuration, location and
physiography, and produce a residential environment of sustained desirability.
II. "DD" Planned Multiple Residence District
A. Height and Area:
(1) No building should exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height unless such
building is set back from the street line a distance of not less than its height and is set
back from all other property lines a distance of thirty (30) feet plus two (2) feet for each
foot in height in excess of forty (40) feet.
(2) No building should be closer than forty (40) feet to any front or rear lot line, or closer
than fifteen (15) feet in the case of a one or two-story building, or closer than thirty (30)
feet in case of a three-story building, to any side lot line.
(3) The lot area per apartment should not be less than: twenty-five hundred (2500) square
feet for an apartment of two bedrooms or more; two thousand (2000) square feet for onebedroom apartment and fifteen hundred (1500) square feet for an efficiency apartment.
Where part or all of the off-street parking spaces required for a multi-family dwelling are
provided within the principal building or buildings, the minimum lot area per dwelling
unit specified in this section may be reduced by a maximum of twenty percent (20%), in
accordance with the following formula:
a/b x 20%, where
a = the number of spaces provided within the building, and
b = the number of spaces required for the multi-family dwelling
 B. General:
(1) The size and location of the tract in relation to surrounding property should be such that
in the proposed development, including landscaping and screening and other adjustments
to the abutting land uses, can be made to harmonize with the neighborhood.
(2) In furthering this objective, the location and arrangement of buildings, parking structures
and areas, walks, lighting, and appurtenant facilities should be adjusted to the
surrounding land uses, and any part of the site not used for buildings or other structures,
or for parking, loading or access-ways should be landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs
or pedestrian walks.
(3) No signs or displays or advertising of merchandise and services offered in the shops
should be visible from outside the building.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 9
APPENDIX 6: GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
III. "OO" Planned Office District
A. Height and Area:
(1) No building should exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless such building is set back from the
street line an additional distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back from all
other property lines a distance of ten (10) feet, plus two (2) feet for each foot of height in excess
of thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) No building should be closer than forty (40) feet to any front or rear lot line, or closer than ten
(10) feet to any side lot line.
B. General:
(1) The size and location of the tract in relation to surrounding property should be such that the
proposed development, including landscaping and screening and other adjustments to the abutting
land uses, can be made to harmonize with the neighborhood.
(2) In furthering this objective, the location and arrangement of buildings, parking structures and area,
walks, lighting, and appurtenant facilities should be adjusted to the surrounding land uses, and any
part of the site not used for buildings or other structures, or for parking, loading or accessways
should be landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs or pedestrian walks.
(3) Signs should be limited to identifications signs relating solely to the occupants and use of the
premises, and all such signs should be attached to the building so as to extend not more than
eighteen (18) inches therefrom in any direction, except that a separate sign when approved in
location, treatment and design as an integral part of the development plan may be permitted. Such
signs should not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet for any premises, and if illuminated, the
source should not be visible from adjoining property.
IV. "EE" Planned Business District
A. Height and Area:
(1) No building should exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, unless such building is located at a
distance of not less than its height from all side and rear lot lines, and occupies no more than ten
(10) percent of the total area of the tract.
(2) No building should be closer than fifty (50) feet to any street line or closer than thirty-five (35)
feet to any other boundary line of the tract that abuts any more restricted district.
(3) The aggregate ground area occupied by all buildings should not exceed twenty-five (25) percent
of the entire area of the tract.
B. General:
(1) The size and location of the tract in relation to surrounding property should be such that the
proposed development, including landscaping and screening and other adjustments to the abutting
land uses, can be made to harmonize with the neighborhood.
(2) Adequate provision should be made for traffic circulation into and out of the development, in
addition to the provision for through traffic movements on the access street or streets, and to this
end, the means of location of all ingress and egress and the provisions for traffic movement and
circulation, including additional traffic lanes, where needed, should be subjected to approval of
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 10
APPENDIX 6: GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
the County Engineer. The installation of additional lanes for deceleration or turning movements
may be required, and traffic controls, as needed, may be imposed to provide for safe and efficient
traffic circulation by and within the development.
(3) Service drives or other areas should be provided for off-street loading, in such a way that trucks
will not block the passage of other vehicles or impede circulation on any other public or private
drive or street.
(4) All drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks should be paved with hard surface material
meeting the approval of the County Engineer.
(5) The location and arrangement of building, parking areas, walks, accessways, lighting and
appurtenant facilities should be adjusted to the surrounding land uses, and no part of any area for
parking should be located within twenty (20) feet of any side line of a residential lot, either
existing or to be created in the future. Any part of the area not used for building or other
structures or for parking, loading or accessways, should be landscaped with grass, trees and
shrubs or pedestrian walks.
(6) All advertising signs should be attached to the building so as to project no more than eighteen (18)
inches therefrom, except that one free-standing sign for identification of the center and entranceexit markers may be permitted for each planned district, and a filling station identification sign
may be permitted where a filling station is a part of the approved development plan. No such
free-standing sign should be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of a
Residence District or within ten (10) feet of the street line. The area of one surface of the sign
should not exceed on hundred fifty (150) square feet in the case of the center identification sign.
(7) All mechanical equipment for heating, cooling, air conditioning or similar purposes, which may
create either noise or fumes, if not within the main building should be located at least one hundred
(100) feet from all property lines within or adjacent to a Residence District.
V. "FF" Planned Light Industrial District
A. Height and Area:
(1) No building should exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, unless it is set back from all property
lines a distance not less than two times the building height.
(2) No part of any building or structure should be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any Residence
District boundary or closer than fifty (50) feet to any other boundary line of the tract, other than
the boundary of an existing Industrial District, or to any street line.
(3) The aggregate ground area occupied by all buildings should not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of
the entire area of the tract.
B. General:
(1) In general, the development should be related to major or secondary highways or to other
industrial or business districts to avoid access over residential uses, and to this end no "FF"
Planned Light Industrial District should be located where the main vehicular approach thereto is
over a residential street (not a major or secondary highway) or through a residential district, unless
the character and operation of the use are such, and it can be clearly demonstrated, that no more
than fifty (50) vehicles in both direction combined would travel to and from the use daily.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 11
APPENDIX 6: GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
(2) Ingress and egress to the development and the location and arrangement of buildings, parking
areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities should be adjusted to the surrounding land uses.
No part of any parking and loading area and access drives thereto should be located within fifty
(50) feet of any Residence District, and no parking or loading area should be closer than fifty (50)
feet to any street line. All drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks should be paved with
hard surface material, and any part of the site not used for buildings or other structures, or for
parking, loading or accessways should be landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs.
(3) No open storage of materials or equipment should be permitted on the tract.
(4) No advertising signs should be permitted other than a sign identifying the establishment or its
products or services attached flat to the building and projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches
therefrom, provided, however, that entrance-exit markers and directional signs, aggregating no
more than ten (10) square feet may be permitted.
(5) Provisions should be made, subject to approval of the County Sanitary Engineer, for satisfactory
disposal of all liquid and solid waste concomitant with the development.
A. Height and Area:
(1) No building should exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, unless it is set back from all property
lines a distance not less than two times the building height.
(2) No part of any building or structure should be closer than two hundred (200) feet to a Residence
District boundary line, or closer than fifty (50) feet to any other boundary line of the tract, other
than the boundary of an existing Industrial District, or to any street line.
(3) The aggregate ground area occupied by all buildings should not exceed forty (40) percent of the
entire area of the tract.
B. General:
(1) The development should be located in relation to major or secondary highways or to other
industrial or business districts in a way to provide easy access to the use and to avoid the use of
residential streets. The development should be related to major or secondary highways or to other
industrial or business districts to avoid access over residential uses, and to this end the District
should be located where the main vehicular approach thereto is over a residential street (not a
major or secondary highway) or through a residential district, unless the character and operation
of the use are such, and it can be clearly demonstrated, that no more than fifty (50) vehicles in
both direction combined would travel to and from the use daily.
(2) Ingress and egress to the development and the location and arrangement of buildings, parking
areas, drives, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities should be adjusted to the surrounding land
uses. No part of any parking and loading areas or access drives there to should be located within
fifty (50) feet of any Residence District, and no parking or loading area should be closer than fifty
(50) feet to any street line. All drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks should be paved
with hard surface material, and any part of the site not used for buildings or other structures, or for
parking, loading or accessways should be landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs.
(3) No open storage of materials or equipment should be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of
any Residence District; any other open storage of materials or equipment visible from any
property line of the tract should be screened by a solid masonry wall not less than eight (8) feet in
height, the design of which is approved by the Rural Zoning Commission.
(4) In order that the operation of the use may not have an effect on surrounding property, all odor,
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 12
APPENDIX 6: GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
dust, smoke, gas, noise, or other industrial concomitants should be so abated or the use should be
so located on the tract that such use is free from offense at all boundary lines of the tract, and
evidence should be submitted, based on testimony or certified statements by competent authorities
in the fields affected, to clearly demonstrate that the use will be free of offense.
(5) Provision should be made, subject to approval of the County Sanitary Engineer, for satisfactory
disposal of all liquid and solid wastes concomitant with the development.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 13
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
ZONE DISTRICTS FEE
RESIDENTIAL
Zoning Map Amendments - Single Family Districts $1,000.00
Zoning Map Amendments - Multiple Family Districts $1,000.00
plus $300.00 per acre
($9,000.00 cap)
NON-RESIDENTIAL
Zoning Map Amendments $1,000.00
SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST
Zoning Map Amendments $1,000.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Amendment processing fees are nonrefundable.
3. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 14
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
FEE
PUD PLANS
Processing fees for PUD-1 applications $1,000.00
Processing fees for PUD-2 applications $1,200.00
S-PUD Recording/Deed of Acceptance fees $100.00
ADJUSTMENTS TO PUD PLANS (PUD-1, PUD-2, AND S-PUD)
Minor Adjustments $200.00
Major Adjustments $1,000.00
APPEAL OF PUD DECISIONS
Appeal of Zoning Commission Decision (PUD-1) $300.00
Appeal of Administrative Official’s Decision (PUD-1,
PUD-2 and S-PUD)
 $300.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. PUD processing fees are nonrefundable.
3. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 15
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS
FEE
APPLICATIONS
Application Fees for Localized Alternative Sign
Regulations
 $700.00
ADJUSTMENTS TO LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS
Minor Adjustments $200.00
Major Adjustments $700.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Processing fees are nonrefundable.
3. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 16
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
CONDITIONAL USES
FEE
CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional Uses $500.00
plus $100.00 per acre
MODIFICATIONS
Modifications to approved Conditional Uses $500.00
 plus $100.00 per acre
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Fees do not include cost of legal ad.
3. Processing fees are nonrefundable.
4. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 17
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
VARIANCES AND APPEALS THROUGH THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
VARIANCES FEE
RESIDENTIAL
Proposed improvements valued up to $25,000 $150.00
Proposed improvements valued over $25,001 $200.00
COMMERCIAL
Proposed Improvements valued up to $500,000 $750.00
Proposed Improvements valued between $500,001 and
$1,000,000
 $1,000.00
Proposed Improvements valued between $1,000,001 and
$10,000,000
 $1,250.00
Proposed Improvements valued above $10,000,000 $2,000.00
ZONING CERTIFICATE
Issuance of a Zoning Certificate Fees are based on the Use type
shown in Appendix 10 - Zoning
Certificates (Minimum $50.00)
PENALTIES
The Board of Zoning Appeals may invoke a penalty fee of
up to two times the application fee when a project is
commenced prior to obtaining an approval.
APPEALS FEE
Appeal to any order, decision, or determination made by
an Administrative Official
 $300.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Fees do not include cost of legal ad.
3. Variances and Appeal processing fees are nonrefundable.
4. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 18
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
NONCONFORMING USE AND COMPATIBLE
NONCONFORMING USE APPLICATIONS
FEE
NONCONFORMITIES
Nonconforming Uses of Land and Structures $50.00
Noncomplying Structures No Charge
Nonconforming Lots of Record No Charge
COMPATIBLE NONCONFORMING USES
Application for Compatible Nonconforming Uses $300.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Fees do not include cost of legal ad.
3. Processing fees are nonrefundable.
4. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 19
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
ZONING CERTIFICATES
ZONING CERTIFICATES FEE
RESIDENTIAL
New Single Family Structure $100.00
New Multi-Family Structure $100.00 per unit
Additions $60.00
Accessory or Temporary Structure (shed, garage, etc.) Under 130 square foot- $25.00
 Over 130 square foot- $60.00
Swimming Pools (in ground and above ground) $60.00
Walls, Fences and Retaining walls $25.00
Decks (attached or detached) $25.00
Antennas and Satellite Dishes $60.00
Plan Review of Modified Zoning Certificate previously issued One half of original certificate cost not
to exceed $150.00
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING CERTIFICATES
Buildings containing 0 to 1,000 sq. ft. $200.00
Buildings containing 1,001 to 2,000 sq. ft. $250.00
Buildings containing 2,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. $0.20 per sq. ft.
Buildings containing more than 10,001 sq. ft. $1,500.00
plus $0.05 per sq. ft. greater than
9,000 sq. ft.
Tents $50.00
Awnings and Marquees $100.00
Commercial Swimming Pools and Storage Tanks $100.00
Commercial Antennas and Satellite Dishes $100.00
Walls and Fences $100.00
Retaining Walls $100.00
New Signs and Billboards $100.00
plus $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign face
over 32 sq. ft.; maximum fee not
to exceed $150.00
Signs - Face Change (one fee per property) $100.00
Signs – Temporary $50.00
Parking Lots (new or re-striping) $100.00
Landfill and Excavation (business only) $1000.00
Gravel Mining/Extraction $500.00
Commercial Alterations (where parking analysis is required) $200.00
Tenant Change/New Tenant (where parking analysis is required) $200.00
Tenant Change/New Tenant (where no parking analysis is required) $50.00
Plan Review of Modified Zoning Certificate previously issued One half the original certificate cost not
to exceed $200.00
OTHER ZONING CERTIFICATES
Refusal Letter (issued for application which does not meet zoning
regulations in order to proceed to the Board of Zoning Appeals)
 $0.00
Zoning Certification Letter (Certifying Zoning on a particular parcel) $35.00
PENALTIES
Failure to obtain a Zoning Certificate prior to the start of construction shall cause the above fees to be
doubled.
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Processing fees are nonrefundable.
3. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 20
APPENDIX 7: FEE SCHEDULE
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS AND GENERAL
MODIFICATIONS BY THE RURAL ZONING COMMISSION
FEE
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS:
Application for an Administrative Interpretation $50.00
GENERAL MODIFICATIONS BY THE RURAL ZONING COMMISSION
Not Requiring a Public Hearing (including)
a. Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas
b. Buffer Yards and Resource Protection
c. Credit of Woodland Preservation and Riparian Buffer
Areas
d. Other
 $300.00
GENERAL MODIFICATIONS BY THE RURAL ZONING COMMISSION
Requiring a Public Hearing (including)
a. Special Purpose and Specific Plan Districts
b. Other
 $500.00
NOTES:
1. Make checks payable to Sycamore Township.
2. Processing fees are nonrefundable.
3. Approved by the Township Trustees on May 2, 2002.
Sycamore Township Zoning Resolution 21